Situational Gita

Ancient Solutions to Modern Life
Struggles

Br. Jagannatha Mishra Dasa

Situational Gita
Ancient Solutions to Modern Life
Struggles
Br. Jagannatha Mishra Dasa
ISBN 9798418105233
© 2023-2024 Br. Jagannatha Mishra Dasa

Situational Gita online:
https://members.vedalearn.net/spaces/13296578

Contents
Preface
What is Bhagavad-gita
Why Bhagavad-gita?
Why this version?
Why me?

1
1
2
2
3

Semblance of the Gita

5

Gita Summary

7

Chapter's summary
1. Observing the Armies on the Battlefield
2. Contents of the Gita Summarized
3. Karma-yoga
4. Transcendental Knowledge
5. Karma-yoga—Action in Krishna Consciousness
6. Dhyana-yoga
7. Knowledge of the Absolute
8. Attaining the Supreme
9. The Most Confidential Knowledge
10. The Opulence of the Absolute
11. The Universal Form
12. Devotional Service
13. Nature, the Enjoyer, and Consciousness
14. The Three Modes of Material Nature
15. The Yoga of the Supreme Person

13
13
13
13
14
14
14
14
15
15
15
15
16
16
16
16

CONTENTS
16. The Divine and Demoniac Natures
17. The Divisions of Faith
18. Conclusion—The Perfection of Renunciation

17
17
17

Gita Explanation, Chapter by Chapter

19

Plot Summary

29

Character list

31

Concepts explained

35

CHAPTER I
Lamenting the consequences of war
Opening
Description of the forces involved
Arjuna's lamentation
The corruption of women and unwanted progenie
The destruction of tradition

53
53
53
53
54
55
55

CHAPTER 2
Identity
Confusion of Arjuna and reproaches of Krishna
The soul and the body
Krishna explains the process of transmigration
The science of action
The path of yoga
The self realized soul
Sense control
Steadiness and peace
How to combat depression
Seek instruction when in a confused state
Words on the death of a loved one
Origin of anger
How to manage anger
Temptation

59
59
59
59
60
60
61
61
62
62
62
63
63
64
64
65

Seeking peace

65

CHAPTER 3
Duty
Krishna instructs Arjuna to fight to set example
The enemy
Reveals the site of the enemy
Action and inaction
Confusion
Laziness
Lust

67
67
68
68
69
69
70
70
70

CHAPTER 4
Transcendental knowledge
Knowledge transmission
Explains His appearance and His mission
Devotional service is the goal
Action and inaction
The necessity of approaching a guru
Value of transcendental knowledge
Feeling shameful
Seeking peace

73
73
73
74
74
74
75
75
76
76

CHAPTER 5
Action and renunciation
Liberation
Most important verse in this chapter

77
77
78
79

CHAPTER 6
Yoga and yogic practice
Astanga yoga
Uncontrolled mind
Laziness
Loneliness
Discriminating
The best yogis

81
81
81
82
83
83
83
83

CONTENTS
CHAPTER 7
The Boss
Overcoming illusion

85
85
87

CHAPTER 8
Life insurance
Destinations and rewards

89
89
90

CHAPTER 9
Krishna's password
After Krishna answered Arjuna's questions
The most secret knowledge
Fools and wise
Manifestations of the Supreme Lord
Sacrifices and worship
The special favor to a bhakta

93
93
93
95
95
95
96
96

CHAPTER 10
The opulence of the Absolute
Manifestations of the Supreme Lord

97
97
97

CHAPTER 11
The Universal Form
Arjuna inquired from Krishna
Advanced spiritualist is everyone's friend
Fighting Demotivation
Asking for forgiveness
Fear

101
101
103
104
105
105
105

CHAPTER 12 107
The dearest worker 107
Krishna is a nice "boss". If you can't do this, do that 109
CHAPTER 13 111
The lawyer in the heart Paramatma 111
Two birds on a tree 112

Loneliness 113
CHAPTER 14 115
The prison bars 115
The three gunas 115
CHAPTER 15
The Scape Plan
Forgetfulness
Elevation beyond the gunas
Conditioned by happiness
Grief, ignorance and knowledge

117
117
117
118
119
119

CHAPTER 16
Divine and evil natures
Dealing with envy
Pride
Greed and lust
Right conduct in jail

121
121
122
122
123
123

CHAPTER 17
The Prison Key
The three types of material existence
The branches of faith
Om Tat Sat
Asat

125
125
125
126
126
127

CHAPTER 18
"Follow Me"
The five factors of the action
Intelligence and determination
The three kinds of happiness
Confusion and forgetfulness
Dealing with envy
Demotivated
Pridelessness

129
129
129
130
130
131
131
131
131

CONTENTS
Fear
Laziness
Feeling shameful and losing hope
Demotivated and losing hope
Duty
The perfect renunciation
Most confidential knowledge
Surrender to the Supreme Lord

132
132
132
132
133
134
135
136

By ࠭eme
Achievements
Ambition
Anger
Boss
Brothers
Children
Competence
Conduct
Confussion
Dealing with envy
Death
Death of a loved one
Decisions
Demotivated
Depression
Determination
Discovering meaning
Discriminated
Existential Crisis
Expectations
Family
Fear
Feeling shameful
Forgetfulness
Friends

139
139
140
141
141
142
143
143
144
144
145
145
146
146
147
148
149
149
150
150
151
152
152
153
154
154

God
Greed
Happiness
Identity
Illusion
Knowledge
Laziness
Leader
Life cycle
Loneliness
Losing hope
Love
Lust
The Master
Material World
Nature
Practice
Practicing Forgiveness
Pride
Professionals
Reincarnation
Relation with God
Repression
Respect
Responsability
Seeking peace
Self Esteem
Sons
Sorrow and Regret
Soul
Spirituality
Teacher
Teams
Temptation
Uncontrolled mind

155
156
156
157
157
158
158
158
159
160
161
161
162
163
163
164
165
165
166
167
168
168
169
169
170
170
171
172
172
174
175
176
177
178
179

CONTENTS
Vital Cycle 179
Work 180
By Verse 183
Glossary 189

Preface
What is Bhagavad-gita
The Bhagavad-gita, is one of the most revered texts in all the Vedic
literature and a vast storehouse of knowledge and philosophy. A
part of the epic poem, The Mahabharata attributed to the sage
Vyasa, it encapsulates the essence of Vedanta.
Composed of seven hundred Sanskrit verses, the Bhagavad-gita is a
dialogue between Prince Arjuna and Sri Krishna, Arjuna's charioteer,
friend and council.
This conversation is about what constitutes right action, proper
understanding and, ultimately, the meaning of life and nature of
the Divine.
It is curious that such an ancient text from a foreign culture has
been so enthusiastically received by Westerners. As a truly great
work of literature, can be read on many levels: metaphysical, moral,
spiritual, and practical; hence its appeal.
These texts are powerful spiritual tools. Like Arjuna, you can ben-
efit from these timeless teachings in your quest for self-confidence
and self-determination. As you read, allow the spiritual wisdom of
these teachings to resonate within you and feel self realization grow
as a result.
This work is based on the verse translations from Bhagavad-gita As
It Is Los Angeles, 1972 by A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada.

2

Preface

3

Why Bhagavad-gita?

Why me?

One of the main reasons the Gita is so cherished is due to its
promotion and discussion of the path of self realization. Besides
the Gita, many of the sacred texts and Vedic teachings advocate a
complete renunciation of the world to lead the life of an ascetic or
hermit. The Gita tells us that this is both a diॻcult and unnecessary
practice.

After studying intensively in various temples around the world
since 1981, I received initiation as a Brahmin, becoming part of the
Gaudiya Vaisnava tradition. Since then, my main activity has been
to deepen and spread the Dharma shastras, the various branches of
Vedic wisdom, and apply them for practical purposes in the modern
world.

Krishna recommends the path of Karma Yoga or selfless service as the
superior and quiࢤest path to realizing the Divine. Towards the end
of the Gita, Krishna places great importance on the role of devotion
and faith in attaining the supreme destination.

In this book, I am sharing with you my experience that includes
many areas of life. I hope it can serve you to significantly improve
some aspect of your spiritual and material well-being.

All the techniques and philosophies that Krishna recommends are
easily practiced and incorporated into your normal daily life and
the Gita gives exact information regarding God, the soul, material
nature, birth, death and life after death.

Why this version?
The Bhagavad-gita is considered to have answers to all our ques-
tions regarding struggles in life. Situational Gita is our attempt to
present the learnings from the Bhagavad-gita curated for applica-
tion in today's world.
Carefully selected slokas from the Gita with their English transla-
tions are available in each category. The text goes on to suggest
situations in modern life where these can come most useful. At the
end of the book you find categories and subcategories to be used as
an index to the themes.

Semblance of the Gita
The Bhagavad-gita is one of the fundamental Vedic texts, and
documents the conversation between Krishna and Arjuna as Arjuna
prepares to go into battle against the Kauravas to procure the
kingdom of Hastinapura.
The Gita is written in Sanskrit and has been translated into virtually
every language. It is dated sometime between 1000 and 700 B.C.E.,
close to when recorded history began in India, and when the battle
that became the Mahabharata occurred.
The Vedas, dated earlier around 1500 B.C. , are considered the most
fundamental texts of Hinduism, but the Gita has become a stand-
alone text that scholars and devotees return to for its emphasis on
self-mastery. Krishna is the sole deity who speaks in the Gita, unlike
other Hindu texts which outline a proliferation of divinities.
The Gita is now considered as seminal a text as the Koran, the Bible,
and other bases of major religions. But the Gita is seen as less a
religious than a philosophical text, outlining a way of life.
This book is about you. We have forgotten who we are. Krishna is
explaining who we are. What's our duty. What is our job dharma .
And how to reach peace, and the subsequent happiness thereof.

Quick Summary
Chapter 1
• On the Kuruksetra battlefield
• Description of the forces involved
• Lamentation of Arjuna

Chapter 2
• Overview of the Bhagavad-gita
• Confusion of Arjuna and reproaches of Krishna
• The soul and the body
• Krishna encouraged Arjuna to fight
• The Path of Yoga
• The realized soul

Chapter 3
• Karma Yoga
• Action and inaction
• The making of sacrifices
• Duty
• Lust

Chapter 4
• The Absolute spiritual knowledge
• Knowledge transmission

8

ࢲiࢤ Summary
• The absolute nature of the Lords acts
• Action
• The various sacrifices
• The acquisition of knowledge

Chapter 5
• Action in Krishna Consciouness
• Renouncement and devotional action
• The sage
• Liberation

Chapter 6
• Sa³khya- yoga
• Yoga and yogic Practice

Chapter 7
• The knowledge of the Absolute
• Energies and powers of the Lord
• Abandonment to Krishna
• Worship of devas
• Intelligence and absence of

Chapter 8
• Reaching the Absolute
• The Absolute, the distinct being, the nature and the act
• Meditation on the Lord and the after-death
• Material and spiritual worlds
• The hour of death

9

Chapter 9
• The most secret knowledge
• Krishna, origin and ultimate rest of everything
• Fools and wise
• Manifestations of the Supreme Lord
• Sacrifices and worship
• The bhakta

Chapter 10
• Glories of the Absolute
• Krishna, original source and repos of everything
• Knowledge and devotion
• Fools and sages
• Krishna, the Supreme
• Manifestations of the Supreme Lord

Chapter 11
• The universal form
• The cosmic form of the Supreme Lord
• Tribute of Arjuna to the Lord
• The original form of the Supreme Lord

Chapter 12
• Devotional service
• Personalism and impersonalism
• Ways to the Supreme Lord
• The loved one to the Lord

10

ࢲiࢤ Summary

Chapter 13
• Prakriti, purusha and consciousness
• The field and the knower of the field
• Knowledge
• The Supreme Soul
• To see with real vision
• Soul within the body

Chapter 14
• The three gunas
• Nature and beings
• Virtue, Passion and Ignorance
• Elevation beyond the gunas

Chapter 15
• The Supreme Person
• The banyan of the material world
• The supreme kingdom
• Conditioning of the living entity by matter
• Krishna, base and sustainer of everything

Chapter 16
• Divine nature
• Demonic nature
• Degradation and elevation of being

11

Chapter 17
• The branches of faith
• Food
• Sacrifices
• Austerities
• Charity
• The om tat sat

Chapter 18
• The perfect renunciation
• Renunciation and sannyasa
• The factors of the action
• Knowledge, action, actor
• Intelligence and determination
• The three kinds of happiness
• The four varnas and duty
• Spiritual realization
• Surrender to the Supreme Lord

Chapterȇs summary
1. Observing the Armies on the
Battleȴeld
As the opposing armies stand poised for battle, Arjuna, the mighty
warrior, sees his intimate relatives, teachers and friends in both
armies ready to fight and sacrifice their lives. Overcome by grief
and pity, Arjuna fails in strength, his mind becomes bewildered,
and he gives up his determination to fight.

2. Contents of the Gita Summarized
Arjuna submits to Lord Krishna as His disciple, and Krishna begins
His teachings to Arjuna by explaining the fundamental distinction
between the temporary material body and the eternal spiritual
soul. The Lord explains the process of transmigration, the nature
of selfless service to the Supreme and the characteristics of a self-
realized person.

3. Karma-yoga
Everyone must engage in some sort of activity in this material
world. But actions can either bind one to this world or liberate one
from it. By acting for the pleasure of the Supreme, without selfish
motives, one can be liberated from the law of karma action and
reaction and attain transcendental knowledge of the self and the
Supreme.

14

Chapter's summary

15

4. Transcendental Knowledge

8. Attaining the Supreme

The spiritual knowledge of the soul, of God, and their relationship-
is both purifying and liberating. Such knowledge is the fruit of self-
less devotional action karma-yoga . The Lord explains the remote
history of the Gita, the purpose and significance of His periodic
descents to the material world, and the necessity of approaching a
guru, a realized teacher.

By remembering Lord Krishna in devotion throughout one's life, and
especially at the time of death, one can attain to His supreme abode,
beyond the material world.

5. Karma-yogaȃAction in Krɧsɧnɧa
Consciousness

Lord Krishna is the Supreme Godhead and the supreme object of wor-
ship. The soul is eternally related to Him through transcendental
devotional service bhakti . By reviving one's pure devotion one
returns to Krishna in the spiritual realm.

Outwardly performing all actions but inwardly renouncing their
fruits, the wise man, purified by the fire of transcendental knowl-
edge, attains peace, detachment, forbearance, spiritual vision and
bliss.

10. The Opulence of the Absolute

6. Dhyana-yoga

All wondrous phenomena showing power, beauty, grandeur or
sublimity, either in the material world or in the spiritual, are but
partial manifestations of Krishna's divine energies and opulence. As
the supreme cause of all causes and the support and essence of
everything, Krishna is the supreme object of worship for all beings.

Astanga-yoga, a mechanical meditative practice, controls the mind
and the senses and focuses concentration on Paramatma the Su-
persoul, the form of the Lord situated in the heart . This practice
culminates in samadhi, full consciousness of the Supreme.

7. Knowledge of the Absolute
Lord Krishna is the Supreme Truth, the supreme cause and sustaining
force of everything, both material and spiritual. Advanced souls
surrender unto Him in devotion, whereas impious souls divert their
minds to other objects of worship.

9. The Most Conȴdential Knowledge

11. The Universal Form
Lord Krishna grants Arjuna divine vision and reveals His spectacu-
lar unlimited form as the cosmic universe. Thus He conclusively
establishes His divinity. Krishna explains that His own all-beautiful
humanlike form is the original form of Godhead. One can perceive
this form only by pure devotional service.

16

Chapter's summary

12. Devotional Service
Bhakti-yoga, pure devotional service to Lord Krishna, is the highest
and most expedient means for attaining pure love for Krishna, which
in turn, is the highest end of spiritual existence. Those who follow
this supreme path develop divine qualities.

13. Nature, the Enjoyer, and
Consciousness

17

16. The Divine and Demoniac
Natures
Those who possess demoniac qualities and who live whimsically,
without following the regulations of scripture, attain lower births
and further material bondage. But those who possess divine quali-
ties and regulated lives, abiding by scriptural authority, gradually
attain spiritual perfection.

17. The Divisions of Faith
One who understands the diॸerence between the body, the soul
and the Supersoul beyond them, both attains liberation from this
material world.

14. The Three Modes of Material
Nature
All embodied souls are under the control of the three modes, or
qualities, of material nature: goodness, passion, and ignorance. Lord
Krishna explains what these modes are, how they act upon us, how
one transcends them, and the symptoms of one who has attained
the transcendental state.

15. The Yoga of the Supreme Person
The ultimate purpose of Vedic knowledge is to detach one self
from the entanglement of the material world and to understand
Lord Krishna as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. One who
understands Krishna's supreme identity surrenders unto Him and
engages in His devotional service.

There are three types of faith, corresponding to and evolving
from the three modes of material nature. Acts performed by those
whose faith is in passion and ignorance yield only impermanent,
material results, whereas acts performed in goodness, in accord
with scriptural injunctions, purify the heart and lead to pure faith
in Lord Krishna and devotion to Him.

18. ConclusionȃThe Perfection of
Renunciation
Krishna explains the meaning of renunciation and the eॸects of the
modes of nature on human consciousness and activity. He explains
Brahman realization, the glories of the Bhagavad-gita, and the
ultimate conclusion of the Gita: the highest path of religion is
absolute, unconditional loving surrender unto Lord Krishna, which
frees one from all sins, brings one to complete enlightenment, and
enables one to return to Krishna's eternal spiritual abode.

Gita Explanation,
Chapter by Chapter
Ζn Chapter One and at the beginning of Chapter Two
Arjuna presents his arguments for refusing to fight. Basically, he
fears the sinful reactions of killing. But after Arjuna surrenders
to Krishna and requests the Lord to instruct him, the Lord begins
countering Arjuna's objections. First, Krishna analytically explains
that fighting in His service is transcendental and will bring no sinful
reaction. Krishna also explains the Vedas' purpose as to gradually
elevate souls to Krishna consciousness. Krishna thus encourages Arjuna
to remain fixed in His service ١ fight ١ and ignore his mind's desires.
As Krishna's explanations why Arjuna should fight were only a
summary, and since Krishna glorifies both ٦buddhi-yoga', intelligence
used in spiritual advancement of knowledge 2.45, 2.49-50 , and
٦karma', work 2.47-48, 2.50 , Arjuna becomes confused and wishes
to use Krishna's instruction to perform ٦buddhi-yoga' as an excuse to
retire the battlefield for a life of contemplation.
Arjuna therefore opens Chapter Three
Asking Krishna why He is encouraging fighting if intelligence is bet-
ter than fruitive work. Krishna then explains ٦karma-yoga', reaction-
free devotional work, and clears up Arjuna's mistaken idea that all
work is fruitive and leads to bondage. Krishna explains that Arjuna
should fight, for avoiding sinful reactions though devotional work
is better than attempting to escape reactions though renouncing
work. Krishna also instructs Arjuna to fight to set the proper example
of duty. Krishna therefore tells Arjuna to fight, but with knowledge
and detachment 3.29-30 , without falling victim to his attractions

20

Gita Explanation, Chapter by Chapter

21

and aversions. Then, answering Arjuna's question on the cause of a
soul's being impelled to improper action or neglect of duty, Krishna
names the enemy: lust. He then recommends Arjuna to regulate
his senses, become fixed in his pure identity as a servant of Krishna,
and thereby avoid lust's control. Then, with spiritual strength and
deliberate intelligence, he should conquer that forceful enemy ١
lust.

act for the satisfaction of Krishna. Impartially viewing the external
world, he should reside in his body, aloof from bodily activities. By
fixing his consciousness on the Supreme and knowing that Krishna
is the true enjoyer, the goal of sacrifice and austerity, and the Lord
of all planets, he, the pure soul, will find true peace beyond this
material world.

Since in Chapter Three, Krɧsɧnɧa has recommended
That Arjuna fights in full knowledge of Him 3.30 , the Lord, in
Chapter Four, explains diॸerent aspects of transcendental knowl-
edge. First, Krishna explains attaining knowledge through the disci-
plic succession. Then after successively explaining His appearance
and then His mission, the Lord explains His devotional service
as the goal Krishna had already referred to the importance of
performing ٦yajna', sacrifice, in 3.9.
Krishna next explains the soul's relationship with Him as His eternal
part and parcel, and why one must approach a bonafide spiritual
master to learn. Chapter Four ends with Krishna glorifying transcen-
dental knowledge and requesting Arjuna to arm himself with this
knowledge ١ which burns all sinful reactions to ashes ١ and fight!
After Arjuna has been impressed with the importance of both work
which requires activity and seeking knowledge which tends to be
inactive , Arjuna is perplexed. His determination is confused, and
he sees fighting and knowledge as contradictory.
Therefore Arjuna opens Chapter Five
By asking Krishna to definitively explain whether the renunciation
of work speculation, ٦sankhya, jnana', inaction-in-knowledge or
work in devotion is superior. Krishna answers that one who is
detached from his work's results is the one who is truly renounced.
Such a person knows that while the body acts, he, the soul, actually
does nothing. Arjuna should, therefore, do his duty and steadily

In the first five chapters, Krishna has explained ٦buddhi-yoga', work-
ing with consciousness focused on Krishna without fruitive desires.
The Lord has also explained ٦sankhya', ٦karma-yoga', and ٦jnana-
yoga' to obtain liberation and as stepping stones to Krishna conscious-
ness. Now, at the end of the Fifth Chapter 5.27-28 and continuing
on to the Sixth Chapter wherein Krishna explains practical points
for a practitioner , Krishna explains ٦dhyana-yoga' concluding that
٦dhyana', or meditation upon Krishna, is meditation's final goal.
Krɧsɧnɧa begins the Sixth Chapter by explaining
That the neophyte yogi engages in fruitive sitting postures while
the advanced yogi, the true ٦sannyasi', works without attachment.
Such a yogi liberates, not degrades, himself by his mind's activities.
Carefully controlling his mind and engaging his body, and his
self in Krishna's service, the yogi strictly practices ٦dhyana-yoga' in
a secluded place. Fixing his mind on the self and on Krishna, he
attains transcendental happiness in the kingdom of God. Arjuna
then points out the main diॻculty in practicing yoga is controlling
the mind. Krishna responds by saying that one can overcome the
obstinate mind through constant practice and determination. In
responding to Arjuna about the fate of an unsuccessful yogi, Krishna
answers that one unsuccessful in his practice will still take birth
in a family of wise transcendentalists and automatically become
attracted to yogic principles. Krishna finally states in the last two
verses of the chapter that the yogi is greater than the ascetic, the
jnani and the karmi. And the greatest of all yogis is he who always
thinks of Krishna and with great faith worships Him in loving service.

22

Gita Explanation, Chapter by Chapter

23

Knowing Krɧsɧnɧaȇs instruction at the end of Chapter
Six

material world. Then, after describing the diॸerent yogic ways in
which one may leave this world, Krishna advises Arjuna not to worry
about other paths ١ either Vedic study, yoga, austere sacrifices,
charity, jnana, or karma ١ for the results of these will all be obtained
through performing devotional service. And in the end, such a yogi
in devotion, reaches the supreme eternal abode.

One should initiate his practice of yoga from the point of con-
centrating the mind upon Krishna. Chapter Seven thus opens with
Krishna explaining knowledge of Himself and His opulent energies.
Thus, Arjuna can fully worship Krishna, as described at the end of
Chapter Six, and think of Him with devotion as he fights. Krishna first
explains that as He is the Supreme Truth, everything in existence
is a combination of His material and spiritual energies. He is the
active principle within all and is all-pervasive through His diverse
material and spiritual energies. Because the world's activities are
conducted by the three modes of nature which emanate from Him,
although Krishna is independent and above them only those who
surrender to Krishna can cross beyond these modes to know Him.
Four kinds of impious souls never surrender to Krishna while four
kinds of pious souls do surrender. Krishna also covers Himself from
the impersonalists, who are less intelligent, and from those who
surrender to the demigods. But those who are truly pious, the un-
deluded, serve Krishna as the governor of the material manifestation,
the demigods, and sacrifice, can know and understand Krishna ١ even
at the time of death.
Chapter Eight begins by Arjuna asking Krɧsɧnɧa
About Brahman, karma, the demigods, the material world, and
knowing Krishna at the time of death. Krishna first briefly answers
Arjuna's first five questions, and then begins explaining in detail
how to know Krishna at the time of death. Since one attains what
one remembers at the time of death, if one remembers Krishna, one
goes to Him. Krishna then explains how He can be constantly thought
of as the transcendental person who knows everything, the oldest
controller, the smallest, the maintainer. Thus, by yoga practice and
remembering Krishna, Krishna explains, one will go to the eternal
spiritual world and never again return to this temporary, miserable

After Krɧsɧnɧa answered Arjunaȇs questions in Chapter
Eight
He continues speaking in Chapter Nine, about the knowledge
about Himself that He had begun explaining in Chapter Seven.
Krishna thus prefaces Chapter Nine by stating that the knowledge
He'll now reveal is most confidential, for it is about His actual
position, which only the non-envious and faithful can understand.
Krishna continues explaining that although independent and aloof,
He pervades, creates and annihilates the entire cosmos through His
material energy. Those mahatmas who know Krishna as the Supreme
Personality of Godhead take shelter of Him and serve Him as
the only enjoyer and the supreme object of worship. Krishna then
explains the fortunate position of such devotees: If one worships
Krishna, Krishna cares, compensates for his deficiencies, and preserves
his strengths. And all Krishna asks for is an oॸering of a leaf, a
flower, or some water ١ if it is oॸered with devotion. Thus, His
devotee comes to Him. Even if a devotee unintentionally commits
a horrendous act, he will be rectified, for Krishna promises that His
devotee will never perish. In Chapters Seven and Nine, Krishna has
explained knowledge of His energies.
Ζn Chapter Ten, Krɧsɧnɧa explains His opulences
More specifically and thereby reveals Himself as the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, the source of all. Krishna also tells how His
pure devotees know that He is the unborn Supreme Lord, the source
of all sages, the source of the material and spiritual worlds, and the

24

Gita Explanation, Chapter by Chapter

25

source of all qualities and attitudes. Thus pure and wise devotees
worship Krishna, converse about Him, and with thoughts dwelling
in Him, undeluded and free from sin, engage in His service. Out
of compassion, Krishna within their hearts destroys any remaining
ignorance. After hearing of Krishna's opulences, Arjuna confirms
Krishna as the Supreme Lord by quoting authorities and explains that
only Krishna can truly know Himself. Krishna then tells of His divine
manifestations within this world ١ as the Supersoul, the ocean, the
Himalayas, etc. ١ which merely indicate His limitless opulences,
for a single fragment of Krishna's energy pervades and supports
this entire universe! Arjuna, although aࢤnowledging that Krishna
in the two-armed form that he now sees before him is Supreme,
still requests Krishna to reveal that all-pervading Universal Form that
supports the Universe.

Ζn Chapter Twelve, Arjuna, after witnessing Krɧsɧnɧaȇs
awesome Universal Form

Thus, in Chapter Eleven, Krɧsɧnɧa proves Himself as the
Supreme Lord
And He establishes the criteria that anyone who claims to be God
must also show a Universal Form. Krishna then reveals to Arjuna
His wondrous eॸulgent, all-expansive form, and Arjuna sees all
soldiers on both sides dying within it. Krishna explains His form as
time, the destroyer of all worlds, and requests that Arjuna, knowing
in advance the inevitable death of all the warriors, become His
instrument. Answering Arjuna's fearful prayers, Krishna first shows
His four-armed form before again returning to His original two-
armed form. Krishna then states that his two-armed form can only be
seen by pure devotees, and such pure devotees, working for Krishna,
free from desiring fruitive activities, and who make Krishna the goal
of their lives, certainly come to Him.

Wishes to clarify his position as a devotee, the highest worshiper
of the Supreme. He thus asks whether worshiping Krishna through
devotional service or worshiping the impersonal is superior. Krishna
immediately responds, saying that one engaged in His personal
service is the topmost. One should therefore engage in Krishna's
service and fix his mind solely upon Krishna, and, if that cannot be
done, one should follow the rules and regulations of ٦bhakti-yoga',
which purify one, so he can later do so. Krishna then describes other
processes that eventually lead to His pure devotional service. Then,
qualities that endear a devotee to Krishna, such as equality in both
happiness and distress, independence from the ordinary course of
activities, satisfaction, and the faithful following of the path of
devotional service. These are also part of the process of worshiping
Krishna in devotional service.
Arjuna opens Chapter Thirteen by inquiring about
the ȴeld of activities
And the knower of that field. Krishna answers that the conditioned
soul's body and the body's interactions within the material world
are His limited field of activities. By understanding the diॸerence
between the body, the soul, and the Supersoul and by following
the process of knowledge, the person can transcend the good and
the bad he meets. He realizes his eternal subordination to Krishna,
and attains the supreme destination. The Thirteenth Chapter clearly
explains that by humbly developing knowledge, one can become
free from material entanglement. It is also explained that the living
entity's entanglement within the material world is due to his
association with the modes of material nature 13. 20-22 .

26

Gita Explanation, Chapter by Chapter
Now, in Chapter Fourteen

The Supreme Personality of Godhead, in detail, explains the three
modes ١ goodness, passion, and ignorance ١ those forces that bind
and control all conditioned souls within this world. A soul can,
however, transcend these modes through devotional service. All
other processes are contaminated by the modes. Thus, the limita-
tions imposed by his field of activities can be overthrown, and the
person can be elevated to the Brahman platform, the constitutional
position of purity and happiness ١ a platform of which Krishna is the
basis.
Ζn Chapter Fifteen
As one must be detached from the modes and their results to be
attached to the service of the Lord, Krishna describes the process of
freeing oneself from the matter's grip. He begins by comparing the
material world to a gigantic, upside-down banyan tree, invoking
Arjuna to detach himself from it through surrender. Thus, the soul
can end his transmigrations and return to Him in the spiritual
world. Although the foolish cannot understand that the soul trans-
migrates, quitting one body to obtain a new body based on his
mind's desires, transcendentalists see this clearly. The foolish can
learn to see properly by understanding that it is Krishna who is the
esplendor of the sun, moon, and fire, the one keeping the planets in
orbit and making vegetables succulent. They can see Krishna as the
fire of digestion; as the Paramatma in everyone's heart; as the giver
of remembrance, knowledge, and forgetfulness; and as the goal of
the Vedas and the compiler of Vedanta. Krishna then reveals that
knowing Him as the Supreme Personality of Godhead and engaging
in His service is the ultimate purpose of the Vedanta and the most
confidential part of the Vedas.

27
Ζn Chapter Sixteen, after mentioning twenty-six
godly qualities
Krishna explains the demoniac nature which degrades the soul
through arrogant, ignorant, and conceited pursuits of sense
gratification and power. Krishna explains the demonic mentality as
follows: The world is unreal and is produced only of sex desire.
Taking shelter of lust, they consider sense gratification to be the
goal of life and scheme to illegally increase their wealth. While
plotting to kill their ٦competitor' enemies, they think themselves
powerful and happy, and, surrounded by their relatives, use
sacrifices and charity only to further increase their happiness.
Perplexed by illusory anxieties, bewildered by self-complacency,
impudency, and wealth, and envying the Supersoul within their
bodies and within the bodies of others, demons blaspheme real
religion. These mischievous, lowest among men are repeatedly
cast by Krishna into demonic species to gradually sink to the
most abominable forms of existence. Krishna ends the chapter by
explaining that because lust, anger, and greed are the beginnings
of demonic life, all sane men should therefore give them up and
understand their duty through faithfully following the scriptures.
Krishna has concluded Chapter Sixteen by declaring that the
ultimate diॸerence between the divine and the demoniac is that
the divine follow the scriptures, while the demons do not.
At the beginning of Chapter Seventeen
Arjuna inquires more about those who don't follow scriptures,
but who worship according to their imaginations. Krishna answers
by describing how the combination of the modes of material
nature that control a particular person will dictate a person's faith,
worship, eating, sacrifices, charity, and austerity. The chapter ends
with Krishna explaining the syllables ٦om tat sat' and how these
syllables indicate that any sacrifice, austerity, or charity dictated by
the modes and performed without devotional service is useless in

28

Gita Explanation, Chapter by Chapter

this life and the next. One should therefore directly take to Krishna's
service in Krishna consciousness.
The entire Bhagavad-gita is concluded in seventeen
Chapters
In the Eighteen Chapter, Krishna reviews the knowledge already pre-
sented. In this chapter Krishna concludes, as He has done throughout
the Bhagavad-gita, that one should practice devotional service ١
Krishna consciousness.
Since Arjuna's basic desire to renounce his duty of fighting was
fear of sinful reaction, Krishna explains true renunciation and how
to transcend sinful reactions through 1 becoming renounced from
the fruits of activities, 2 abiding by the order of the Supersoul,
and 3 worshiping the Lord through one's fruits of work by acting
either as ٦brahmana', 'ksatriya', 'vaisya', or ٦sudra' according to
one's mode of nature. Thus, one can achieve the self-realized
position of ٦brahma-bhuta' and in that position, detached from all
material things, one can practice pure devotional service.
Krishna can only be known through surrendering to Him in devo-
tional service, and by this direct process ١ free from karma or
jnana, Arjuna should need not fear any sinful reactions. Under
Krishna's protection, such a pure devotee will reach "Krishna-loka".
Krishna instructs Arjuna that he should surrender to the Supreme
Lord within his heart and thus attain peace in His supreme, eternal
abode. The most confidential knowledge is then explained by Krishna:
"Become My devotee, always think of Me, act for Me, worship Me,
and oॸer all homage unto Me. Surrender unto Me alone. Do not
fear sinful reactions."
After hearing the instructions of Sri Krishna, Arjuna is fixed and
ready to fight. After narrating this conversation to Dhritarashtra,
Sanjaya ecstatically thinks of the wondrous two-armed form of
Krishna and predicts victory for Arjuna, the supreme archer, for he
is surrendered to Krishna, the master of all mystics.

Plot Summary
The Bhagavad-gita opens with blind King Dhritarashtra requesting
his secretary Sanjaya, to narrate the battle between his sons, the
Kauravas, and their cousins, the Pandavas.
Krishna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, out of aॸection for His
devotee, the Pandava prince Arjuna, has agreed to drive his chariot.
As Arjuna takes up his bow and prepares to fight, he sees the sons of
Dhritarashtra drawn in military array and requests infallible Krishna
to draw his chariot between the two fighting forces.
There in the midst of both armies, Arjuna's mind reels as he foresees
the imminent death of his teacher, relatives, and friends. He throws
down his bow and arrows and decides not to fight.
Overcome with sorrow, Arjuna sinks into despair at the thought of
the inevitable bloodshed. He tells Krishna that he cannot be a part of
any action that will result in so much death and misery.

Character list
Ananta
Ananta is the cosmic serpent that is often seen with Vishnu as part
of his avatar.
Arjuna
Arjuna is the central figure of the Gita. He is Krishna's disciple, and
asks for help when he has to fight his own family in order to take
command of a kingdom that is rightfully his brother Yudhishthira's.
He is one of the five Pandava brothers, and next in line to take over
Hastinapura. At first, Arjuna is weak of heart, unsure how he can
fight his kin for a kingdom. But Krishna shows him that fighting and
ruling is his unavoidable duty.
Aryaman
Aryaman is mentioned in passing in the Gita as a demigod who
was an ancestor of mankind.
Ashvatthama
Ashvatthama is also mentioned in passing in the Gita, and should
be noted only as a great archer and warrior, who is Drona's son.
Bhisma
Bhisma fights against Arjuna, as one of the elders of the opposing
Kaurava family. Arjuna and Sanjaya make it a point to extol
Bhisma's courage and will.
Brahma
Brahma is one of the most revered Vedic deities, and is also known
as the Creator. Brahma shouldn't be confused with Brahman, which
is a concept, as opposed to a manifested deity.
Buddha
Siddhartha Gautama Shakyamuni, who renounced all material

32

Character list

33

possessions and his worldly life to seek enlightenment. He found
nirvana in the course of his journey during the sixth century B. C.

as Arjuna's charioteer, and comes to earth precisely to help Arjuna
see his dharmic duty. In the Gita, Krishna asserts full omnipotence
as the ultimate deity, and reveals both his human and most divine
form. Krishna's name literally means ٦The infinitement fascinant.'

Dhritarashtra
Dhritarashtra is the king of the Kurus. Blind since birth, he serves
as the king of Hastinapura, but is not the rightful ruler. The Gita
begins with Dritarashtra aiming to keep the kingdom in the hands
of his family, and willing to battle against Arjuna, the rightful heir,
in order to keep it.
Drona
Drona is the general of the Kaurava army who fights against Arjuna
and his Pandava brothers.
Duryodhana
Duryodhana is the son of Dhriharashtra, who tries to bequeath
him a kingdom which isn't rightfully his. Duryodhana, then, is
the antagonist of the upcoming battle documented in the Gita, and
Arjuna's chief enemy in battle.
Gandiva
Arjuna's bow, gifted by the demigods.
Garuda
Garuda is the eagle which serves as Vishnu's form of transport.
Indra
Indra is mentioned in the Gita as the god of battle.
Janaka
Janaka is referenced by Krishna as a king in ancient times who was
wise, ruled eॸectively, and found a satvic way of presiding over his
people.
Kauravas
The Kauravas are the sons of Kuru, or rather the sons of Dhritarash-
tra. Duryodhana and his brothers are the Kauravas and they fight
against Arjuna and the Pandavas.
KӂӊҮa
Krishna is the main character of the Gita. Here in battle, he serves

Madhava
Madhava is another name for Krishna.
Manu
Manu is known as the father of the human race, or the "first man"
of mankind.
Pandavas
The sons of "Pandu" are the Pandavas, and include Arjuna and
his brothers Bhima, Nakula, Sahadeva, and Yudhishthira. Arjuna
and the Pandavas have to fight the Kauravas for the kingdom of
Hastinapura although the Pandavas have the rightful claim to it.
Pritha
Pritha is mentioned in passing as Arjuna's mother.
Rama
Rama was the son of Dasharatha and the king of Ayodhya. He is
famous for being the titular hero of the Ramayana, who slayed the
demon Ravana to rescue his wife Sita.
Sanjaya
Sanjaya is the wise sage who recounts the Gita epic to the blind
king Dritarashtra, who cannot witness what is happening on the
battlefield.
Shiva
Shiva completes the "Trinity" of deities with Brahma and Vishnu ١
and is also known as the Destroyer.
Vishnu
Vishnu is the Preserver, responsible for maintaining the cycle of
dharma and karma in the world ١ and thus comes to the earth in
various incarnations.

34

Character list

Yudhishthira
Arjuna's brother, and the rightful heir to the kingdom.

Concepts explained
What does KҬҴҘa teaࠪ Arjuna?
• The science of self-realization.
• The exact process by which a human being can establish their
eternal relationship with God.
• The purpose and goal of human existence.
• The eternal principles that are essential for spiritual life.
• Material nature.
• Life on higher and lower planets.
• How to attain life on higher planets.
• How to be free from the cycle of birth, death, and rebirth
moksha .
"That very ancient science of the relationship with the Supreme is
today told by me to you because you are My devotee as well as My
friend and can therefore understand the transcendental mystery of
this science." Sri Krishna to Arjuna Bg. 4.3 .
Creation
"In the beginning of creation, the Lord of all creatures sent forth
generations of men and demigods, along with sacrifices for Visnu,
and blessed them by saying, Be thou happy by this yajna sacrifice
because its performance will bestow upon you all desirable things."
Bg. 3.10 .
Materialism carries away the intelligence of a person
Modern lifestyles partying, indiscriminate sex, lust for material
objects, greed, ego, desires , Western culture and Bollywood culture
copying the west , Western pop music and Indian pop music copy
of Western music turns a person of intelligence into an ignorant.

36

Concepts explained

Materialism slowly and steadily drains away the intelligence of a
person.
"As a boat on the water is swept away by a strong wind, even one
of the senses on which the mind focuses can carry away a man's
intelligence" Bg. 2.67 .
"While contemplating the objects of the senses, a person develops
attachment for them, and from such attachment lust develops,
and from lust anger arises. From anger, complete delusion arises,
and from delusion bewilderment of memory. When memory is
bewildered, intelligence is lost, and when intelligence is lost one
falls down again into the material pool" Bg. 2.62-63 .
What causes one to engage in sinful acts?
It is lust, which induces one to sinful acts. Lust bewilders and
entangles one in the material world. Lust presents itself in the
senses, mind, and intelligence.
"Arjuna said: by what is one impelled to sinful acts, even unwill-
ingly, as if engaged by force? The Blessed Lord said: It is lust only,
Arjuna, which is born of contact with the material mode of passion
and later transformed into wrath, and which is the all-devouring
sinful enemy of this world" Bg. 3.36-37 .
Self-control and Yoga practice can counteract lust
"Thus knowing oneself to be transcendental to material senses,
mind and intelligence, one should control the lower self by the
higher self and thus—by spiritual strength—conquer this insatiable
enemy known as lust Bg. 3.43 .
Life on other Planets originate from Earth
"The seven great sages and before them the four other great sages
and the Manus progenitors of mankind are born out of My mind,
and all creatures in these planets descend from them." Bg. 10.6 .

37
God does take forms
"Fools deride Me when I descend in the human form. They do not
know My transcendental nature and My supreme dominion over
all that be" Bg. 9.11 .
࠭e Lord Appears in Every Millennium
"Although I am unborn and my transcendental body never deterio-
rates, and although I am the Lord of all living entities, I still appear
in every millennium in my original transcendental form" Sri Krishna
4.6 .
Why Does the Lord Appear?
"Whenever and wherever there is a decline in religious practice, O
descendant of Bharata, and a predominant rise of irreligion—at that
time I descend Myself. In order to deliver the pious and to annihilate
the miscreants, as well as to reestablish the principles of religion, I
advent Myself millennium after millennium" 4.7-8 .
Sri Krishna appeared 5000 years ago for two reasons, firstly to destroy
the ignorant people of that time to uphold righteousness and truth,
and to teach the science of God, the Bhagavad-gita to Arjuna and
mankind. Even before the war started, Sri Krishna told Arjuna that
apart from him and his four brothers, all the soldiers on both sides
would be killed. Arjuna was merely an instrument used by the Lord
to destroy the ignorant men.
Who are we?
We are not the physical body but the soul. The soul is present in the
heart of every living being. The soul is 1/10,000th of the upper point
of a single hair. Although so minute, the soul is so powerful that
it animates the entire body with consciousness. It is situated in the
heart and when it leaves the body, the heart stops beating, as a result
the blood stops circulating and the entire body disintegrates. There
are 8.4 million diॸerent forms of bodies, the individual soul can
reside in. Unlike the physical body, the soul can never be destroyed.

38

Concepts explained

39

"For the soul there is never birth nor death. Nor, having once
been, does he ever cease to be. He is unborn, eternal, ever-existing,
undying and primeval. He is not slain when the body is slain." Bg.
2.20 .

should meditate upon Me within the heart and make Me the
ultimate goal of life" Bg. 6.13-14 .
What will we be in our next life?

࠭ere is life aࠨer death

"Whatever state of being one remembers when he quits his body,
that state he will attain without fail" Bg. 8.6 .

"Never was there a time when I did not exist, nor you, nor all these
kings; nor in the future shall any of us cease to be. As the embodied
soul continuously passes, in the body from childhood to youth to
old age, the soul similarly passes into another body at death. A sober
person is not bewildered by such a change" Bg. 2.12-13 .

"One who, at the time of death, fixes his life air between the
eyebrows and in full devotion engages himself in remembering the
Supreme Lord, will certainly attain to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead" Bg. 8.10 .

"As a person puts on new garments, giving up old ones, similarly,
the soul accepts new material bodies, giving up the old and useless
ones" Bg. 2.22 .

"After being situated in this yoga practice and vibrating the sacred
syllable om, the supreme combination of letters, if one thinks of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead and quits his body, he will
certainly reach the spiritual planets" Bg. 8.13 .

"For one who has taken his birth, death is certain; and for one who
is dead, birth is certain. Therefore, in the unavoidable discharge of
your duty, you should not lament" Bg. 2.27 .
What is Yoga?
"Be steadfast in yoga, O Arjuna. Perform your duty and abandon
all attachment to success or failure. Such evenness of mind is called
yoga" Bg. 2.48 .
One should Practice Yoga to Attain the Supreme
"To practice yoga, one should go to a secluded place and should lay
kusha-grass on the ground and then cover it with a deerskin and
a soft cloth. The seat should neither be too high nor too low and
should be situated in a sacred place. The yogi should then sit on it
very firmly and should practice yoga by controlling the mind and
the senses, purifying the heart and fixing the mind on one point"
Bg. 6.11-12 .
"One should hold one's body, neࢤ and head erect in a straight line
and stare steadily at the tip of the nose. Thus with an unagitated,
subdued mind, devoid of fear, completely free from sex life, one

"When one dies in the mode of goodness, he attains the pure higher
planets. When one dies in the mode of passion, he takes birth among
those engaged in fruitive activities; and when he dies in the mode
of ignorance, he takes birth in the animal kingdom" Bg. 14.14-15 .
"Those situated in the mode of goodness gradually go upward to
the higher planets; those in the mode of passion live on the earthly
planets; and those in the mode of ignorance go down to the hellish
worlds" Bg. 14.18 .
"The living entity in the material world carries his diॸerent concep-
tions of life from one body to another as the air carries aromas" Bg.
15.8 .
Life on Material Planets
"From the highest planet in the material world down to the lowest,
all are places of misery wherein repeated birth and death take place.
But one who attains to My abode, O son of Kunti, never takes birth
again." Bg. 8.16 .

40

Concepts explained

41

࠭e Mind can be the greatest enemy or the best friend

God is present in every living being

"A man must elevate himself by his own mind, not degrade himself.
The mind is the friend of the conditioned soul, and his enemy as
well. For him who has conquered the mind, the mind is the best of
friends; but for one who has failed to do so, his very mind will be
the greatest enemy" Bg. 6.5-6 .

"I am the Self, O Gudakesa, seated in the hearts of all creatures. I
am the beginning, the middle and the end of all beings" Bg. 10.20 .

Establishing Intelligence
"For one who is so situated in the Divine consciousness, the three-
fold miseries of material existence exist no longer; in such a happy
state, one's intelligence soon becomes steady. One who is not in
transcendental consciousness can have neither a controlled mind
nor steady intelligence, without which there is no possibility of
peace. And how can there be any happiness without peace?" Bg.
2.65-66 .
Being happy in this life
"Before giving up this present body, if one is able to tolerate the
urges of the material senses and cheࢤ the force of desire and anger,
he is a yogi and is happy in this world" Bg. 5.23 .
Every being is equal
A God conscious person does not make any distinction between
species, man, and animal. Sri Krishna is present within the heart
of every heart as the Supersoul and thus there is no distinction
between diॸering bodies.
All beings are equal
"The humble sage, by virtue of true knowledge, sees with equal
vision a learned and gentle brahmana, a cow, an elephant, a dog
and a dog-eater outcaste " Bg. 5.18 .
"I envy no one, nor am I partial to anyone. I am equal to all. But
whoever renders service unto Me in devotion is a friend, is in Me,
and I am also a friend to him" Bg. 9.29 .

What is real knowledge?
"Humility, pridelessness, nonviolence, tolerance, simplicity,
approaching a bona fide spiritual master, cleanliness, steadiness
and self-control; renunciation of the objects of sense gratification,
absence of false ego, the perception of the evil of birth, death, old
age and disease; nonattachment to children, wife, home and the
rest, and evenmindedness amid pleasant and unpleasant events;
constant and unalloyed devotion to Me, resorting to solitary
places, detachment from the general mass of people; accepting the
importance of self-realization, and philosophical search for the
Absolute Truth-all these I thus declare to be knowledge, and what
is contrary to these is ignorance" Bg. 13.8-12 .
Who is a miser?
Those who think only of themselves, those who enjoy while aware
of those who cannot, those who are greedy, those who have no
consideration for others and those who do not share are misers.
"Those who want to enjoy the fruits of their work are misers" Bg.
2.49 .
A person of steady mind
"One who is not disturbed in mind even amidst the threefold
miseries or elated when there is happiness, and who is free from
attachment, fear and anger, is called a sage of steady mind" Bg.
2.56 .
A person in a state of perfect knowledge
"He who is without attachment, who does not rejoice when he
obtains good, nor lament when he obtains evil, is firmly fixed in
perfect knowledge" Bg. 2.57 .
A person in a state of perfect consciousness

42

Concepts explained

"One who is able to withdraw his senses from sense objects, as the
tortoise draws his limbs within the shell, is to be understood as truly
situated in knowledge" Bg. 2.58 .

43
A person of steady intelligence
"One who restrains his senses and fixes his consciousness upon Me
is known as a man of steady intelligence" Bg. 2.61 .
"Therefore, O mighty-armed, one whose senses are restrained from
their objects is certainly of steady intelligence" Bg. 2.68 .
Aࠪieving peace with the self
"A person who is not disturbed by the incessant flow of desires—
that enter like rivers into the ocean which is ever being filled but is
always still—can alone achieve peace, and not the man who strives
to satisfy such desires. A person who has given up all desires for
sense gratification, who lives free from desires, who has given up
all sense of proprietorship and is devoid of false ego—he alone can
attain real peace" Bg. 2.70-71 .
࠭ose who will be liberated from material existence soon
"Those who are free from anger and all material desires, who
are self-realized, self-disciplined and constantly endeavoring for
perfection, are assured of liberation in the Supreme in the very near
future" Bg. 5.26 .
What is the Kingdom of God like?
The kingdom of Sri Krishna is a place without anxiety. It lies far
beyond the material planets. It is eternal, full of countless spiritual
planets where Krishna's Visnu expansions reside. The kingdom is
called Vaikuntha. A planet shaped like a lotus flower, stands in the
midst of Vaikuntha.
There, the trees fulfill all desires, palaces are made of touchstones,
and cows supply unlimited milk. Sri Krishna enjoys life there with his
loving devotees. Those who reach the supreme abode of Sri Krishna,
never return to the material planets.
"That abode of Mine is not illumined by the sun or moon, nor by
electricity. One who reaches it never returns to this material world"
Bg. 15.6 .

44

Concepts explained

45

"That supreme abode is called unmanifested and infallible, and it
is the supreme destination. When one goes there, he never comes
baࢤ. That is My supreme abode" Bg. 8.21 .

services with love and generosity, without expecting a reward.
Give, but do not take.

How does one attain salvation?
"One can understand the Supreme Personality as He is only by
devotional service. And when one is in full consciousness of the
Supreme Lord by such devotion, he can enter into the kingdom of
God" Bg. 18.55 .
"And whoever, at the time of death, quits his body, remembering
Me alone, at once attains My nature. Of this there is no doubt" Bg.
8.5 .
Surrender the result of all activities to Lord KҬҴҘa

Famous people should set a good example
"Whatever action is performed by a great man, common men follow
in his footsteps. And whatever standards he sets by exemplary acts,
all the world pursues" Bg. 3.21 .
Cycles of Creation and Desolation
Brahmaloka is the highest planet in the material universe, the living
entities there are called the Brahma. One day on the planet of
Brahma Brahmaloka is 1000 cycles of four ages yugas on the
planet Earth.
Satya Yuga

"One who performs his duty without attachment, surrendering the
results unto the Supreme God, is not aॸected by sinful action, as the
lotus leaf is untouched by water. The yogis, abandoning attachment,
act with body, mind, intelligence, and even with the senses, only
for the purpose of purification. The steadily devoted soul attains
unadulterated peace because he oॸers the result of all activities to
Me; whereas a person who is not in union with the Divine, who is
greedy for the fruits of his labor, becomes entangled" 5.10-12 .

Treta Yuga

Engage in Yoga

Dvapara Yuga

Engage in Buddhi Yoga ١ Work Actions without attachment to
the results. Oॸer the results of all work to Sri Krishna. By working
without attachment, one attains the Supreme. Play for enjoyment,
not to win or lose.

Increased decline in the truth and religious values takes eॸect in
this age. The yuga lasts 864,000 years. The humans in this age live
up to 1000 years.

Engage in Karma Yoga ١ Actions in Krishna consciousness. One who
works in devotion, with the mind and senses controlled, is in divine
consciousness. Although the senses are engaged with sense objects,
one is aloof from them if engaged in Krishna consciousness, situated
in peace and happiness.

The age of irreligion following false religions and ignorance.
The truth is being virtually non-existent. The yuga lasts
432,000 years. The humans in this age live up to 100 years.
Thus, one single day 12 hours on the planet of Brahma is:
1000 1,728,000+1,296,000+864,000+432,000
1000 4,320,000
4320,000,000 human years.

Engage in Dhyana Yoga ١ Work Actions without a desire for
reward. Give, but do not expect anything in return. Oॸer your

The age of the truth and true religion. The yuga age lasts 1.728
million years. The humans in this age live up to 100,000 years.
The introduction of ignorance takes place in this age. The yuga age
lasts 1.296 million years. The humans in this age live up to 10,000
years.

Kali Yuga

46

Concepts explained

47

The night is also of the same duration. And Brahma lives up to 100
years. The life of Brahma is truly fantastic by comparison to the life
of humans on Earth.

us. By understanding that the three modes are active and not we.
By realizing that we are separate from the modes of nature. In this
way, the influence of material nature gradually diminishes on us.

"By human calculation, a thousand ages taken together is the
duration of Brahma's one day. And such also is the duration of
his night. When Brahma's day is manifest, this multitude of living
entities comes into being, and at the arrival of Brahma's night they
are all annihilated. Again and again the day comes, and this host
of beings is active; and again the night falls, O Partha, and they are
helplessly dissolved" Bg. 8.17-19 .

"Material nature consists of the three modes-goodness, passion and
ignorance. When the living entity comes in contact with nature, he
becomes conditioned by these modes" Bg. 14.5 .

࠭is is the age of Kali Yuga
We are 5000 years into the age of Kali yuga, we still have 427,000
years to go, before Lord Krishna incarnates himself as Sri Kalki
and destroys all the material planets. The Kali yuga is the age of
darkness, irreligion spread of false religions and ignorance. No
one can argue with this.
The whole world is full of violence and truth being virtually non-
existent. Greed, lust, anger, materialism, and violence have covered
the minds of most people.

࠭e Mode of Goodness
A person in the mode of goodness is free from all sinful reactions
and is in a condition of happiness and knowledge. One who dies in
the mode of goodness attains the higher planets.
"O sinless one, the mode of goodness, being purer than the others,
is illuminating, and it frees one from all sinful reactions. Those situ-
ated in that mode develop knowledge, but they become conditioned
by the concept of happiness" Bg. 14.6 .
"That gift which is given out of duty, at the proper time and place, to
a worthy person, and without expectation of return, is considered
to be charity in the mode of goodness" Bg. 17.20 .
Simple Food is dear to those in the mode of Goodness

"In this age of quarrel and hypocrisy, the only means of deliverance
is chanting the holy name of Lord Krishna, there is no other way.
There is no other way. There is no other way."

"Foods in the mode of goodness increase the duration of life,
purify one's existence and give strength, health, happiness and
satisfaction" Bg. 17.8 .

God helps from within

࠭e Mode of Passion

Devotees engaged in pure devotional service to Sri Krishna, even if
laࢤing education or knowledge of the Vedic principles, are helped
from within by Sri Krishna, who is present in the heart of all living
beings as the super soul. Sri Krishna personally destroys the darkness
born of ignorance.

A person in the mode of passion is plagued by unlimited desires
for material enjoyment, greed and lust especially sexual pleasures .
To satisfy these desires, one is always forced to engage in hard
work that binds the person to sinful reactions, resulting in misery.
A person in this mode is never satisfied with the position already
acquired.

࠭e ࠭ree Modes of Nature
One is in one of three modes of nature, goodness, passion, and
ignorance. These modes compete in exerting their influence upon

One, who dies in the mode of passion, takes birth again on Earth
among persons engaged in material desires, greed and lust.

48

Concepts explained

"The mode of passion is born of unlimited desires and longings, O
son of Kunti, and because of this one is bound to material fruitive
activities" Bg. 14.7 .
"Charity performed with the expectation of some return, or with
a desire for fruitive results, or in a grudging mood, is said to be
charity in the mode of passion" Bg. 17.21 .
Hot and salty food is dear to those in the mode of Passion
"Foods that are too bitter, too sour, salty, pungent, dry and hot, are
liked by people in the modes of passion. Such foods cause pain,
distress, and disease" Bg. 17.8 .
࠭e Mode of Ignorance
A person in the mode of ignorance is in a delusion. It fosters laziness,
foolishness, and madness. One who dies in the mode of ignorance
takes birth in the animal kingdom or on the hellish planets.
"O son of Bharata, the mode of ignorance causes the delusion of all
living entities. The result of this mode is madness, indolence and
sleep, which bind the conditioned soul" Bg. 14.8 .
Processed and frozen food is dear to those in the mode of
Darkness
"Food cooked more than three hours before being eaten, which is
tasteless, stale, putrid, decomposed and unclean, is food liked by
people in the mode of ignorance" Bg. 17.9 .

49
Classes of Beings
"There are two classes of beings, the fallible and the infallible. In
the material world every entity is fallible, and in the spiritual world
every entity is called infallible" Bg. 15.16 .
࠭e Galities of Godly Persons
"The Blessed Lord said: Fearlessness, purification of one's existence,
cultivation of spiritual knowledge, charity, self-control, perfor-
mance of sacrifice, study of the Vedas, austerity and simplicity;
nonviolence, truthfulness, freedom from anger; renunciation, tran-
quility, aversion to faultfinding, compassion and freedom from
covetousness; gentleness, modesty and steady determination; vigor,
forgiveness, fortitude, cleanliness, freedom from envy and the
passion for honor-these transcendental qualities, O son of Bharata,
belong to godly men endowed with divine nature" Bg. 16.1-3 .
Galities of Demonic People
"Arrogance, pride, anger, conceit, harshness and ignorance-these
qualities belong to those of demonic nature, O son of Prtha" Bg.
16.4 .
࠭e Demonic do not accept Sri KҬҴҘa as the Supreme Being
It is known that God is all merciful, but God is never merciful to
the demoniac. The demoniac people, life after life, are put into the
wombs of similar demons.
"Bewildered by false ego, strength, pride, lust and anger, the demon
becomes envious of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who
is situated in his own body and in the bodies of others, and
blasphemes against the real religion. Those who are envious and
mischievous, who are the lowest among men, are cast by Me into
the ocean of material existence, into various demoniac species of
life. Attaining repeated birth amongst the species of demoniac life,
such persons can never approach Me. Gradually they sink down to
the most abominable type of existence" Bg. 16.18-20 .

50

Concepts explained

࠭e ࠭ree Gates to Hell
"There are three gates leading to this hell-lust, anger, and greed. Ev-
ery sane man should give these up, for they lead to the degradation
of the soul" Bg. 16.21 .
Study the Bhagavad-gita
"And I declare that he who studies this sacred conversation wor-
ships Me by his intelligence. And one who listens with faith and
without envy becomes free from sinful reaction and attains to the
planets where the pious dwell" Bg. 18.70-71 .
Truth Alone Triumphs
"Wherever there is Krsna, the master of all mystics, and wherever
there is Arjuna, the supreme archer, there will also certainly be
opulence, victory, extraordinary power, and morality. That is my
opinion", Sanjaya told the King Bg. 18.78 .
"The Blessed Lord said: Son of Prtha, a transcendentalist engaged in
auspicious activities does not meet with destruction either in this
world or in the spiritual world; one who does good, My friend, is
never overcome by evil Bg. 6.40 .
Yoga vs. Renunciation
A number of Eastern religions preach a strict form of asceticism,
which involves learning to renounce action and will. Renunciation
becomes a process, then, of casting oॸ worldly possessions and
obligations and proceeding on a quest for nirvana, as the Buddha
did. But Vedism, as dictated by the Gita, urges yoga instead of
renunciation.
Yoga is literally "skill in action," or the process of using selfless
action — action designed only to unite with the divine — as the
true process to achieving enlightenment. For we cannot help but
act, says Krishna. It is our nature — and for that reason, we must
learn to act in accordance with the divine.
Sattva vs. Rajas

51
The three gunas oॸer three diॸerent qualities which can either sup-
port or infect our lives on Earth. The ideal, or the least destructive
guna, is sattva — which supports harmony, purity, and balance in
the body. Rajas is its opponent, born of passion and often a primary
driver of ego, anger, greed, and lust. And finally, there is tamas, or
disconnection — a person eagerly clouds themselves in ignorance
and darkness to avoid the process of reaching yoga. These three
gunas present a person's natural inclinations. As long as a person is
aware of which one he is naturally born to, as a result of his karma,
then he can slowly move toward sattva and eventually toward a
yoga which is free from the burden of the gunas.
Karma vs. Dharma
The terms dharma and karma often get confused by new students
and with good reason — they are both products of the samsaric
cycle of birth and death, but they have entirely diॸerent spheres
of purpose. Karma is the accumulation of debt of action in the
course of a person's samsaric cycle. Every action has a reaction
and over the course of a lifetime, if one is in accordance with the
divine, he will gradually work oॸ his or her karma. If he is acting
selfishly and for ego, then he will accumulate more karma to work
oॸ. Reborn, each person finds their "dharma" or duty in order to
work oॸ this karma. Some are born to wealthy families, others to
poor ones, some to spiritual families, others to evil-doing ones.
Proof vs. Faith
One of the more subtle themes in the Gita is the contrast between
faith and evidence — and humanity's inclination to want to "see"
something to believe it. Indeed, one of the central tenants of
Buddhism is that we must believe what we see — and spend our
lives trying to see as clearly as possible.
But Arjuna keeps asking for evidence, or practicalities of how to
achieve yoga and meditation, and Krishna finally oॸers him the sight
of him in his most powerful form.

52

Concepts explained

࠭eory vs. Action
Arjuna is constantly asking Krishna for pragmatic advice of how to
put the Gita into concrete action. This emphasis on action is at the
core of the entire work. What Krishna gives Arjuna, then, are clear
steps and hierarchies for achieving the path of yoga.
First oॸ, he says meditation is the most important element, for
meditation allows a focus on the divine that will inform every
aspect of one's life. Second, there is selfless service, and finally,
though not as powerful, one can also turn to blind renunciation.
Krishna sees enlightenment as a process that requires self-control and
self-discipline in a series of concrete steps.
Jnana vs. Vijnana
Jnana is knowledge — and Krishna preaches knowledge as the first
step towards true nirvana. The self-awareness that comes with
understanding the role of the divine in everything we do will help
guide a person towards yoga. But this is not enough. Krishna also
encourages vijnana, or the act of using jinana in life, as the key to
finding spiritual peace. Vijnana is simply yogic action — or being
able to maintain self-awareness at every moment in life — even at
the moment of death.

CHAPTER Ζ
Lamenting the consequences of war
The stage is set for the conversation between Sri Krishna and Arjuna
in the battlefield of Kurukshetra in about 3102 B.C.

Opening
The story opens to the scene of a battlefield just prior to the start
of a colossal war. Gathered on the battlefield of Kurukshetra, the
Pandavas and the Kauravas are preparing for war.

Description of the forces involved
As the opposing armies stand poised for battle, Arjuna, the mighty
warrior, sees his intimate relatives, teachers and friends in both
armies ready to fight and sacrifice their lives.
Dhrtarashtra asks Sanjaya about the current situation in the battle-
field:
"Dhrtarashtra said: O Sanjaya, after assembling in the place of
pilgrimage at Kurukshetra, what did my sons and the sons of Pandu
do, being desirous to fight?"
Duryodhana, son of Dhrtarashtra and leader of the opposing army
expresses his confidence in victory:

54

CHAPTER I

55

"Our strength is immeasurable, and we are perfectly protected
by Grandfather Bhisma, whereas the strength of the Pandavas,
carefully protected by Bhima, is limited."

The corruption of women and
unwanted progenie

Arjunaȇs lamentation

"With the destruction of dynasty, the eternal family tradition is
vanquished, and thus the rest of the family becomes involved in
irreligious practice."

Arjuna patrols the battlefield and asks his divine charioteer, Krishna,
to place his chariot between the two armies so he can see who he has
to fight. To his dismay, Arjuna sees in both armies friends, family,
teachers, and respected elders, all willing to fight and die.

"When irreligion is prominent in the family, 0 Krishna, the women
of the family become corrupt, and from the degradation of woman-
hood, 0 descendant of Vrishni, comes unwanted progeny."

"Arjuna said: 0 infallible one, please draw my chariot between the
two armies so that I may see who is present here, who is desirous
of fighting, and with whom I must contend in this great battle
attempt."
He ponders that the kingdom is not necessarily worth the deaths of
so many people. He worries that killing is a sinful act, especially if
he is killing members of his own family.
"Sin will overcome us if we slay such aggressors. Therefore it is not
proper for us to kill the sons of Dhrtarashtra and our friends. What
should we gain, 0 Krishna, husband of the goddess of fortune, and
how could we be happy by killing our own kinsmen?"
Knowing that by engaging in this war, family members and friends
will be lost on both sides of the battle line, Arjuna is faced with a
personal and ethical crisis.
Arjuna expounds his reasons for his non violence, presents his
arguments for refusing to fight. Basically, he says fears the sinful
reactions of killing:
"O Janardana, although these men, overtaken by greed, see no fault
in killing one's family or quarreling with friends, why should we,
with knowledge of the sin, engage in these acts?"

The destruction of tradition
"Due to the evil deeds of the destroyers of family tradition, all kinds
of community projects and family welfare activities are devastated."
Overcome by grief and pity, Arjuna fails in strength, his mind
becomes bewildered, and he gives up his determination to fight:
"Sa³jaya said: Arjuna, having thus spoken on the battlefield, cast
aside his bow and arrows and sat down on the chariot, his mind
overwhelmed with grief."
The history is, that the same family, there was dispute who would
occupy the throne. DhӄtaraӌӖra was actually the eldest son of the
king, and next was PaҰѶu. So by the law of primogeniture, the
eldest child occupies the throne.
So there were two parties. DhӄtaraӌӖra was the eldest son, but he
was blind, bodily defective. Therefore he was not awarded the
throne. His next brother, PaҰѶu, he was oॸered the throne, but
he died in a very early age, a young man. And the PaҰѶus, his
five sons, YudhiӌӖhira, Bhima, Arjuna, Nakula, Sahadeva, they were
very small children.

56

CHAPTER I

57

They were taken care of by DhӄtaraӌӖra and other elderly family
like Bhiӌmadeva. He was the grandfather of the PaҰѶavas. He
was the elder uncle of DhӄtaraӌӖra. Bhiӌma was elder brother of
DhӄtaraӌӖra's father.

So they come to see that "we have got good government", there
is no cause of anxiety. We have got suॻcient food, suॻcient
protection, suॻcient opulence—everything suॻcient." That is good
government.

Now, after the death of PaҰѶu, there was conspiracy. DhӄtaraӌӖra
wanted that "Actually, this is my kingdom. Now, somehow or other,
I could not get it. Now my brother is dead. So if I do not inherit, why
not my sons?"

‫ ܍‬TAKE AWAYS

This was the politics. Politics are always there, and enviousness,
jealousy.
This is the nature of this material world. You cannot avoid it.
Spiritual world means just the opposite, there are no politics. There
is no jealousy. There is no enviousness. That is spiritual world. And
material world means politics, jealousy, diplomacy, enviousness,
so many things. This is material world. So even in the heavenly
planets, these things are there, politics. Even in animal kingdom
these politics are there.
One man is envious of another man. It doesn't matter even they are
brothers or family members. Here the family members, DhӄtaraӌӖra
and PaҰѶu, two brothers, their sons, they were family members, but
the enviousness caused the whole problem.
So formerly, when there was fight between two kings, it is on the
principle that who is giving good protection to the citizens, not for
personal profit. Who is able to give good protection, life, security
for life and property, he should become king. So these persons, this
DhӄtaraӌӖra and his sons, they were jealous. How they could give
protection to the citizens? They are themselves jealous.
Just like nowadays, all these politicians, they are jealous. They can-
not give any protection to the citizens. They are simply interested
with their party politics.
They have no time even to think how to give nice protection to the
citizen so that they may feel happy always.

Conࣧdence in victory in all paths of life is due to having good
relations, people that you can rely on for advice and support.

CHAPTER 2
Ζdentity
Arjuna accepts the position of a disciple of Krishna and requests him
to instruct on how to dispel his grief. This chapter also summarizes
the contents of the Gita.

Confusion of Arjuna and reproaches
of Krɧsɧnɧa
Krishna begins His teachings to Arjuna by telling him to stop posing
as a person that cares and knows.
"The Blessed Lord said: While speaking learned words, you are
mourning for what is not worthy of grief. Those who are wise
lament neither for the living nor the dead."
"Never was there a time when I did not exist, nor you, nor all these
kings; nor in the future shall any of us cease to be."

The soul and the body
Krishna continues His discourse by explaining the fundamental dis-
tinction between the temporary material body and the eternal
spiritual soul:
"Know that which pervades the entire body is indestructible. No
one is able to destroy the imperishable soul."

60

CHAPTER 2

"For the soul there is never birth nor death. Nor, having once
been, does he ever cease to be. He is unborn, eternal, ever-existing,
undying and primeval. He is not slain when the body is slain."

Krɧsɧnɧa explains the process of
transmigration
"As the embodied soul continually passes, in this body, from boy-
hood to youth to old age, the soul similarly passes into another body
at death. The self-realized soul is not bewildered by such a change."

The science of action
Krishna encouraged Arjuna to fight:
"Considering your specific duty as a ksatriya, you should know that
there is no better engagement for you than fighting on religious
principles; and so there is no need for hesitation."
"Do thou fight for the sake of fighting, without considering happi-
ness or distress, loss or gain, victory or defeat -and, by so doing,
you shall never incur sin."
"Those who are on this path are resolute in purpose, and their aim
is one. 0 beloved child of the Kurus, the intelligence of those who
are irresolute is many-branched."
"You have a right to perform your prescribed duty, but you are not
entitled to the fruits of action. Never consider yourself to be the
cause of the results of your activities, and never be attached to not
doing your duty."
"Be steadfast in yoga, 0 Arjuna. Perform your duty and abandon
all attachment to success or failure. Such evenness of mind is called
yoga."

61

The path of yoga
The nature of selfless service to the Supreme is described:
"O Dhananjaya, rid yourself of all fruitive activities by devotional
service, and surrender fully to that consciousness. Those who want
to enjoy the fruits of their work are misers."
"A man engaged in devotional service rids himself of both good and
bad actions even in this life. Therefore strive for yoga, 0 Arjuna,
which is the art of all work.""
The wise, engaged in devotional service, take refuge in the Lord, and
free themselves from the cycle of birth and death by renouncing the
fruits of action in the material world. In this way they can attain
that state beyond all miseries."

The self realized soul
Characteristics of a self-realized person:
"The Blessed Lord said: 0 Partha, when a man gives up all varieties
of sense desire which arise from mental concoction, and when his
mind finds satisfaction in the self alone, then he is said to be in pure
transcendental consciousness."
"One who is not disturbed in spite of the threefold miseries, who
is not elated when there is happiness, and who is free from
attachment, fear and anger, is called a sage of steady mind."
"He who is without attachment, who does not rejoice when he
obtains good, nor lament when he obtains evil, is firm ly fixed in
perfect knowledge."

62

CHAPTER 2

63

Sense control

arise from sense perception. 0 scion of Bharata, and one must learn
to tolerate them without being disturbed."

"One who is able to withdraw his senses from sense objects, as the
tortoise draws his limbs within the shell, is to be understood as truly
situated in knowledge."

"Such a liberated person is not attracted to material sense pleasure
or external objects but is always in trance, enjoying the pleasure
within. In this way the self-realized person enjoys unlimited happi-
ness, for he concentrates on the Supreme."

"One who can control his senses by practicing the regulated prin-
ciples of freedom can obtain the complete mercy of the Lord and
thus become free from all attachment and aversion."

Steadiness and peace
"For one who is so situated in the Divine consciousness, the three-
fold miseries of material existence exist no longer; in such a happy
state, one's intelligence soon becomes steady."
"A person who is not disturbed by the incessant flow of desires-
that enter like rivers into the ocean which is ever being filled but is
always still-can alone achieve peace, and not the man who strives
to satisfy such desires."
"A person who has given up all desires for sense gratification, who
lives free from desires, who has given up all sense of proprietorship
and is devoid of false ego-he alone can attain real peace."

How to combat depression
"O son of Prtha, do not yield to this degrading impotence. It does
not become you. Give up such petty weakness of heart and arise, O
chastiser of the enemy."
"O son of Kunti, the non-permanent appearance of happiness
and distress, and their disappearance in due course, are like the
appearance and disappearance of winter and summer seasons. They

Seek instruction when in a confused
state
"Now I am confused about my duty and have lost all composure
because of weakness. In this condition I am asking You to tell me
clearly what is best for me. Now I am Your disciple, and a soul
surrendered unto You. Please instruct me."

Words on the death of a loved one
"As the embodied soul continually passes, in this body, from boy-
hood to youth to old age, the soul similarly passes into another body
at death. The self-realized soul is not bewildered by such a change."
"For the soul there is never birth nor death. Nor, having once
been, does he ever cease to be. He is unborn, eternal, ever-existing,
undying and primeval. He is not slain when the body is slain."
"As a person puts on new garments, giving up old ones, similarly,
the soul accepts new material bodies, giving up the old and useless
ones."
"It is said that the soul is invisible, inconceivable, immutable, and
unchangeable. Knowing this, you should not grieve for the body."

64

CHAPTER 2

"For one who has taken his birth, death is certain; and for one who
is dead, birth is certain. Therefore, in the unavoidable discharge of
your duty, you should not lament."

Origin of anger
"While contemplating the objects of the senses, a person develops
attachment for them, and from such attachment lust develops, and
from lust anger arises."
"From anger, delusion arises, and from delusion bewilderment of
memory. When memory is bewildered, intelligence is lost, and
when intelligence is lost, one falls down again into the material
pool."

65

Temptation
"The senses are so strong and impetuous, 0 Arjuna, that they
forcibly carry away the mind even of a man of discrimination who
is endeavoring to control them."
"A person who is not disturbed by the incessant flow of desires-
that enter like rivers into the ocean which is ever being filled but is
always stillcan alone achieve peace, and not the man who strives
to satisfy such desires."

Seeking peace

"Those who are free from anger and all material desires, who are self
realized, self-disciplined and constantly endeavoring for perfection,
are assured of liberation in the Supreme in the very near future."

"One who is not in transcendental consciousness can have neither a
controlled mind nor steady intelligence, without which there is no
possibility of peace. And how can there be any happiness without
peace?"

"There are three gates leading to this hell-lust, anger, and greed. Ev-
ery sane man should give these up, for they lead to the degradation
of the soul."

"A person who has given up all desires for sense gratification, who
lives free from desires, who has given up all sense of proprietorship
and is devoid of false ego-he alone can attain real peace."

How to manage anger

"There are three gates leading to this hell-lust, anger, and greed. Ev-
ery sane man should give these up, for they lead to the degradation
of the soul."

"One who is not disturbed in spite of the threefold miseries, who
is not elated when there is happiness, and who is free from
attachment, fear and anger, is called a sage of steady mind."
"One who restrains his senses and fixes his consciousness upon Me
is known as a man of a steady inteligence."

"One should perform sacrifice, penance and charity with the word
tat. The purpose of such transcendental activities is to get free from
the material entanglement."
‫ ܍‬TAKE AWAYS
࠭e way to aࠪieve happiness is to tolerate all desires and
remain satisࣧed by engaging in duty, while ࣧxing consciouness
in the Supreme.

CHAPTER 3
Duty
Krishna delivers a stern talk to Arjuna about the duties every member
of the society needs to carry out. Arjuna opens the chapter asking
Krishna why He is encouraging fighting if intelligence is better than
fruitive work.
"Arjuna said: O Janardana, O Kesava, why do You urge me to engage
in this ghastly warfare, if You think that intelligence is better than
fruitive work?"
Krishna then explains ٦karma-yoga', reaction-free devotional work,
and clears up Arjuna's mistaken idea that all work is fruitive and
leads to bondage:
"All men are forced to act helplessly according to the impulses born
of the modes of material nature; therefore no one can refrain from
doing something, not even for a moment."
"One who restrains the senses and organs of action, hut whose mind
dwells on sense objects, certainly deludes himself and is called a
pretender."
"On the other hand, he who controls the senses by the mind and
engages his active organs in works of devotion, without attachment,
is by far superior. Perform your prescribed duty, for action is better
than inaction."
"A man cannot even maintain his physical body without work.
Krishna explains that Arjuna should fight, for avoiding sinful reac-
tions though devotional work is better than attempting to escape
reactions though renouncing work."

68

CHAPTER 3

69

"Work done as a sacrifice for Vishnu has to be performed, otherwise
work binds one to this material world. Therefore, 0 son of Kunti,
perform your prescribed duties for His satisfaction, and in that way
you will always remain unattached and free from bondage."

"The Blessed Lord said: It is lust only, Arjuna, which is born of
contact with the material modes of passion and later transformed
into wrath, and which is the all-devouring, sinful enemy of this
world."

Krɧsɧnɧa instructs Arjuna to ȴght to set
example

Reveals the site of the enemy

"A self-realized man has no purpose to fulfill in the discharge of his
prescribed duties, nor has he any reason not to perform such work.
Nor has he any need to depend on any other living being."

"The senses, the mind and the intelligence are the sitting places of
this lust, which veils the real knowledge of the living entity and
bewilders him."
He then recommends Arjuna to regulate his senses, become fixed
in his pure identity, and thereby avoid lust's control:

Krishna therefore tells Arjuna to fight, but with knowledge and
detachment, without falling victim to his own attractions and
aversions:

"Then, with spiritual strength and deliberate intelligence, he should
conquer that forceful enemy ١lust."

"Attraction and repulsion for sense objects are felt by embodied
beings, but one should not fall under the control of senses and
sense objects because they are stumbling bloࢤs on the path of self-
realization."

"Thus knowing oneself to be transcendental to material senses,
mind and intelligence, one should control the lower self by the
higher self and thusby spiritual strength, conquer this insatiable
enemy known as lust."

"Bewildered by the modes of material nature, the ignorant fully
engage themselves in material activities and become attached. But
the wise should not unsettle them, although these duties are inferior
due to the performers' laࢤ of knowledge."

Action and inaction

The enemy
Arjuna's question on the cause of a soul's being impelled to
improper action or neglect of duty:
"Arjuna said: O descendant of Vrishni, by what is one impelled to
sinful acts, even unwillingly, as if engaged by force?"
Krishna names the enemy: lust.

"It is far better to discharge one's prescribed duties, even though
they may be faulty, than another's duties. Destruction in the course
of performing one's own duty is better than engaging in another's
duties, for to follow another's path is dangerous."
Everyone must engage in some sort of activity in this material
world. But actions can either bind one to this world or liberate one
from it. By acting for the pleasure of the Supreme, without selfish
motives, one can be liberated from the law of karma action and
reaction and attain transcendental knowledge of the self and the
Supreme.

70

CHAPTER 3

71

"Therefore, without being attached to the fruits of activities, one
should act as a matter of duty; for by working without attachment,
one attains the Supreme."

higher self and thusby spiritual strength - conquer this insatiable
enemy known as lust."

Confusion
"Arjuna said: My intelligence is bewildered by Your equivocal
instructions. Therefore, please tell me decisively what is most
beneficial for me."

Laziness
"Perform your prescribed duty, for action is better than inaction.
A man cannot even maintain his physical body without work.
Even kings like Janaka and others attained the perfectional stage
by performance of prescribed duties.Therefore,just for the sake of
educating the people in general, you should perform your work."

Lust
"The Blessed Lord said: It is lust only, Arjuna, which is born of
contact with the material modes of passion and later transformed
into wrath, and which is the all-devouring, sinful enemy of this
world."
"Therefore, 0 Arjuna, best of the Bharatas, in the very beginning
curb this great symbol of sin lust by regulating the senses, and
slay this destroyer of knowledge and self-realization."
"Thus knowing oneself to be transcendental to material senses,
mind and intelligence, one should control the lower self by the

‫ ܍‬TAKE AWAYS
Nobody is free from action, so actions are to be performed in
our line of duty and with spiritual consciousness. ࠭en actions
lead to liberation instead of bondage.

CHAPTER 4
Transcendental knowledge
Since in Chapter Three, Krishna has recommended that Arjuna fight
in full knowledge of Him, in Chapter Four, He explains diॸerent
aspects of transcendental knowledge. This four first chapters are
the ABC of the Gita.

Knowledge transmission
First Krishna explains attaining knowledge through the disciplic
succession:
"The Blessed Lord said: I instructed this imperishable science of
yoga to the sun-god, Vivasvan, and Vivasvan instructed it to Manu,
the father of mankind, and Manu in turn instructed it to lksvaku."
"This supreme science was thus received through the chain of
disciplic succession, and the saintly kings understood it in that way.
But in course of time the succession was broken, and therefore the
science as it is appears to be lost."
"That very ancient science of the relationship with the Supreme is
today told by Me to you because you are My devotee as well as My
friend; therefore you can understand the transcendental mystery of
this science."

74

CHAPTER 4

75

Explains His appearance and His
mission

"One is understood to be in full knowledge whose every act is
devoid of desire for sense gratification. He is said by sages to be
a worker whose fruitive action is burned up by the fire of perfect
knowledge."

"Although I am unborn and My transcendental body never deterio-
rates, and although I am the Lord of all sentient beings, I still appear
in every millennium in My original transcendental form."

"Abandoning all attachment to the results of his activities, ever
satisfied and independant, he performs no fruitive action, although
engaged in all kinds of undertakings."

"Whenever and wherever there is a decline in religious practice, 0
descendant of Bharata, and a predominant rise of irreligion-at that
time I descend Myself."

"Such a man of understanding acts with mind and intelligence
perfectly controlled, gives up all sense of proprietorship over his
possessions and acts only for the bare necessities of life. Thus
working, he is not aॸected by sinful reactions."

"In order to deliver the pious and to annihilate the miscreants, as
well as to reestablish the principles of religion, I advent Myself
millennium after millennium."

The necessity of approaching a guru
Devotional service is the goal
"One who knows the transcendental nature of My appearance and
activities does not, upon leaving the body, take his birth again in
this material world, but attains My eternal abode, 0 Arjuna."
"Being freed from attachment, fear and anger, being fully absorbed
in Me and taking refuge in Me, many, many persons in the past
became puritied by knowledge of Me-and thus they all attained
transcendental love for Me."
"All of them-as they surrender unto Me - I reward accordingly.
Everyone follows My path in all respects, 0 son of Prtha."

Action and inaction
"One who sees inaction in action, and action in inaction, is intelli-
gent among men, and he is in the transcendental position, although
engaged in all sorts of activities."

"Just try to learn the truth by approaching a spiritual master. Inquire
from him submissively and render service unto him. The self-
realized soul can impart knowledge unto you because he has seen
the truth."

Value of transcendental knowledge
"O chastiser of the enemy, the sacrifice of knowledge is greater
than the sacrifice of material possessions. 0 son of Prtha, after all,
the sacrifice of work culminates in transcendental knowledge. In
this world, there is nothing so sublime and pure as transcendntal
knowledge."
"Such knowledge is the mature fruit of all mysticism. And one who
has achieved this enjoys the self within himself in due course of
time."

76

CHAPTER 4

Krishna glorifies transcendental knowledge and requests Arjuna to
arm himself with this knowledge ١ which burns all sinfull reactions
to ashes ١ and fight!

CHAPTER 5

"Therefore the doubts which have arisen in your heart out of
ignorance should be slashed by the weapon of knowledge. Armed
with yoga, 0 Bharata, stand and fight."

Action and renunciation

Feeling shameful

Arjuna opens Chapter Five by asking Krishna to definitively explain
whether the renunciation of work or work in devotion is superior:

"Even if you are considered to be the most sinful of all sinners, when
you are situated in the boat of transcendental knowledge, you will
be able to cross over the ocean of miseries."

"Arjuna said: O Krishna, first of all You ask me to renounce work,
and then again You recommend work with devotion. Now will You
kindly tell me definitely which of the two is more beneficial?"

"As the blazing fire turns firewood to ashes, 0 Arjuna, so does the
fire of knowledge bum to ashes all reactions to material activities."

Lord Krishna explains the concepts of action with detachment and
renunciation in actions and how both are a means to the same goal
of salvation:

Seeking peace

"The Blessed Lord said: The renunciation of work and work in
devotion are both good for liberation. But, of the two, work in
devotional service is better than renunciation of works."

"A faithful man who is absorbed in transcendental knowledge and
who subdues his senses quiࢤly attains the supreme spiritual peace."
‫ ܍‬TAKE AWAYS
Approaࠪ a spiritual master and get transcendental knowledge
from him to burn all karma and attain the supreme spiritual
peace.

Krishna answers that one who is detached from his work's results is
the one who is truly renounced:
"Such a person knows that while the body acts, he, the soul, actually
does nothing."
"One who neither hates nor desires the fruits of his activities is
known to be always renounced. Such a person, liberated from all
dualities, easily overcomes material bondage and is completely
liberated, 0 mighty-armed Arjuna."
"Only the ignorant speak of karma-yoga and devotional service
as being diॸerent from the analytical study of the material world
[sankhya]. Those who are actually learned say that he who applies
himself well to one of these paths achieves the results of both."

78

CHAPTER 5

79

"One who knows that the position reached by means of renuncia-
tion can also be attained by works in devotional service and who
therefore sees that the path of works and the path of renunciation
are one, sees things as they are."

benefactor and well-wisher of all living entities, attain peace from
the pangs of material miseries."

Arjuna should therefore, do his duty and steadily act for the
satisfaction of Krishna:
"One who works in devotion, who is a pure soul, and who controls
his mind and senses, is dear to everyone, and everyone is dear to
him. Though always working, such a man is never entangled."
Impartially viewing the external world, he should reside in his body
aloof from bodily activities:
"A person in the divine consciousness, although engaged in seeing,
hearing, touching, smelling, eating, moving about, sleeping, and
breathing, always knows within himself that he actually does
nothing at all."
"Because while speaking, evacuating, receiving, opening or closing
his eyes, he always knows that only the material senses are engaged
with their objects and that he is aloof from them."
"One who performs his duty without attachment, surrendering the
results unto the Supreme God, is not aॸected by sinful action, as
the lotus leaf is untouched by water."

Liberation
By fixing his consciousness on the Supreme and knowing that
Krishna is the true enjoyer, the goal of sacrifice and austerity, and
the Lord of all planets, he the pure soul, will find true peace beyond
this material world:
"The sages, knowing Me as the ultimate purpose of all sacrifices and
austerities, the Supreme Lord of all planets and demigods and the

Most important verse in this chapter
"The sages, knowing Me as the ultimate purpose of all sacrifices and
austerities, the Supreme Lord of all planets and demigods and the
benefactor and well-wisher of all living entities, attain peace from
the pangs of material miseries."
In the first five chapters, Krishna has explained ٦buddhi-yoga', work-
ing with consciousness focused on Krishna without fruitive desires.
The Lord has also explained ٦sankhya', ٦karma-yoga', and ٦jnana-
yoga' to obtain liberation and as stepping stones to Krishna conscious-
ness.
Now, at the end of the Fifth Chapter 5.27-28 and continuing
on to the Sixth Chapter wherein Krishna explains practical points
for a practicioner , Krishna explains ٦dhyana yoga' concluding that
٦dhyana', or meditation upon Krishna, is meditation's final goal.
Outwardly performing all actions but inwardly renouncing their
fruits, the wise man, purified by the fire of transcendental knowl-
edge, attains peace, detachment, forbearance, spiritual vision and
bliss.
‫ ܍‬TAKE AWAYS
We should know the purpose of all sacriࣧces, austerities, the
Supreme Lord of all creation and the well wisher and friend of
all living entities. ࠭is is the way to peace and freedom from
miseries.

CHAPTER 6
This Chapter is about the best way of thinking, what is the mind
and how to utilize it. The last verse is the conclusion.

Yoga and yogic practice
Krishna begins the Sixth Chapter by explaining that the neophyte
yogi engages in fruitive sitting postures while the advanced yogi,
the true ٦sannyasi', works without attachment. Such a yogi liberates,
not degrades, himself by his mind's activities.
Carefully controlling his mind and engaging it body, and his self
in Krishna's service, the yogi strictly practices ٦dhyana yoga' in a
secluded place. Fixing his mind on the self and on Krishna, he attains
transcendental happiness in the kingdom of God.
Arjuna then points out the main diॻculty in practicing yoga is con-
trolling the mind. Krishna responds by saying that one can overcome
the obstinate mind through constant practice and determination.
In responding to Arjuna's about the fate of an unsuccessful yogi,
Krishna answers that one unsuccessful in his practice will still take
birth in a family of wise transcendentalists and automatically
become attracted to yogic principles.

Astanga yoga
Astanga-yoga is a mechanical meditative practice, to control the
mind and the senses and focus concentration on Paramatma the

82

CHAPTER 6

83

Supersoul, the form of the Lord situated in the heart . This practice
culminates in samadhi, full consciousness of the Supreme.

Laziness

Lord Krishna talks about ٦astanga yoga,' and how to practice it, so
one may gain mastery of the mind and reveal the spiritual nature:

"There is no possibility of one's becoming a yogi, 0 Arjuna, if one
eats too much, or eats too little, sleeps too much or does not sleep
enough."

"To practice yoga, one should go to a secluded place and should lay
kusha-grass on the ground and then cover it with a deerskin and a
soft cloth."

Loneliness

"The seat should neither be too high nor too low and should be
situated in a sacred place. The yogi should then sit on it very firmly
and should practice yoga by controlling the mind and the senses,
purifying the heart and fixing the mind on one point."

"For one who sees Me everywhere and sees everything in Me, I am
never lost, nor is he ever lost to Me."

Uncontrolled mind

Discriminating

"A man must elevate himself by his own mind, not degrade himself.
The mind is the friend of the conditioned soul, and his enemy as
well."

"He is a perfect yogi who, by comparison to his own self, sees the
true equality of all beings, both in their happiness and distress, 0
Arjuna!"

"For him who has conquered the mind, the mind is the best of
friends; but for one who has failed to do so, his very mind will
be the gratest enemy."

The best yogis

"From whatever and wherever the mind wanders due to its fliࢤer-
ing and unsteady nature, one must certainly withdraw it and bring
it baࢤ under the control of the Self."
"The Blessed Lord said: 0 mighty-armed son of Kunti, it is undoubt-
edly very diॻcult to curb the restless mind, but it is possible by
constant practice and by detachment."

Krishna finally states in the last two verses of the chapter that the
yogi is greater than the ascetic, the jnani and the karmi. And the
greatest of all yogis is he who always thinks of Krishna and with grest
faith worships Him in loving service.
"And of all yogis, he who always abides in Me with great faith,
worshiping Me in transcendental loving service, is most intimately
united with Me in yoga and is the highest of all."
‫ ܍‬TAKE AWAYS
࠭e best yogi is who always worships KҬҴҘa with great faith in
transcendental loving service.

CHAPTER 7
The Boss
Reasons why Krishna is the boss:
• Owner of everything
• Manager of everything
• He enjoys everything
Knowing Krishna's instruction at the end of Chapter Six, one should
initiate his practice of yoga from the point of concentrating of the
mind upon Krishna.
Chapter Seven thus opens with Krishna explaining knowledge of
Himself and His opulent energies. Arjuna can fully worship Krishna,
as described at the end of Chapter Six, and think of Him with
devotion as he fights:
"Now hear, O son of Pӄtha Arjuna , how by practicing yoga in full
consciousness of Me, with mind attached to Me, you can know Me
in full, free from doubt."
Krishna first explains that as He is the Supreme Truth, everything
in existence is a combination of His material and spiritual energies.
He is the active principle within all and is all-pervasive through His
diverse material and spiritual energies:
"Earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind, intelligence and false ego—
altogether these eight comprise My separated material energies."
"Besides this inferior nature, O mighty-armed Arjuna, there is a
superior energy of Mine, which are all living entities who are
struggling with material nature and are sustaining the universe."

86

CHAPTER 7

Because the world's activities are conducted by the three modes
of nature which emanate from Him, only those who surrender to
Krishna can cross beyond these modes to know Him. Four kinds of
impious souls never surrender to Krishna while four kinds of pious
souls do surrender:
"Those miscreants who are grossly foolish, lowest among mankind,
whose knowledge is stolen by illusion, and who partake of the
atheistic nature of demons, do not surrender unto Me."
"O best among the Bharatas Arjuna , four kinds of pious men
render devotional service unto Me—the distressed, the desirer of
wealth, the inquisitive, and he who is searching for knowledge of
the Absolute."
Krishna also covers Himself from the impersonalists, who are less
intelligent, and from those who surrender to the demigods:
"I am never manifest to the foolish and unintelligent. For them I am
covered by My eternal creative potency yoga-maya ; and so the
deluded world knows Me not, who am unborn and infallible."
But those who are truly pious, the undeluded, serve Krishna as the
governor of the material manifestation, the demigods, and sacrifice,
can know and understand Krishna ١ even at the time of death:
"Those who know Me as the Supreme Lord, as the governing
principle of the material manifestation, who know Me as the one
underlying all the demigods and as the one sustaining all sacrifices,
can, with steadfast mind, understand and know Me even at the time
of death."
Lord Krishna is the Supreme Truth, the supreme cause and sustaining
force of everything, both material and spiritual. Advanced souls
surrender unto Him in devotion, whereas impious souls divert their
minds to other objects of worship.

87

Overcoming illusion
Lord Krishna tells us about the Absolute reality, why it is diॻcult to
overcome Maya and the four types of people that are attracted to,
and opposed to divinity:
"This divine energy of Mine, consisting of the three modes of mate-
rial nature is diॻcult to overcome. But those who have surrendered
unto Me, can easily cross beyond it."
‫ ܍‬TAKE AWAYS
࠭e transcendental nature of the ultimate reality, the impor-
tance of surrender and devotion, and the signiࣧcance of acquir-
ing spiritual knowledge to attain liberation.

CHAPTER 8
Life insurance
Krishna wants to convince us to work for him. What are we going
to get in return? Krishna teaches us what we are going to get. What
Krishna gives, is an oॸer that no one can compete with.
Krishna gives us something that no boss gives: eternal life insurance.
You get all results of tapasya, learning, etc.:
"A person who accepts the path of devotional service is not bereft of
the results derived from studying the Vedas, performing sacrifices,
undergoing austerities, giving charity or pursuing philosophical
and fruitive activities. Simply by performing devotional service,
he attains all these, and at the end he reaches the supreme eternal
abode."
Chapter Eight begins by Arjuna asking Krishna about Brahman,
karma, the demigods, the material world, and knowing Krishna at
the time of death.
Krishna first briefly answers Arjuna's five questions and then begins
explaining in detail how to know Krishna at the time of death.
Since one attains what one remembers at the time of death, if
one remembers Krishna, one goes to Him. Krishna then explains how
He can be constantly thought of as the transcendental person
who knows everything, the oldest controller, the smallest, the
maintainer.
"Whatever state of being one remembers when he quits his body,
that state he will attain without fail."
Thus by practicing yoga and remembering Krishna, Krishna explains,

90

CHAPTER 8

one will go to the eternal spiritual world and never again to return
to this temporary, miserable material world.
"One who, at the time of death, fixes his life air between the
eyebrows and in full devotion engages himself in remembering the
Supreme Lord, will certainly attain to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead."
Then, after describing the diॸerent yogic ways in which one may
leave this world, Krishna advises Arjuna not worry about other
paths ١ either Vedic study, yoga, austere sacrifices, charity, jnana,
or karma ١ for the results of these will all be obtained through
performing bhakti.
And in the end, such a yogi in devotion, reaches the supreme eternal
abode.
By remembering Lord Krishna in devotion throughout one's life, and
especially at the time of death, one can attain to His supreme abode,
beyond the material world.

Destinations and rewards
Lord Krishna explains the various ways of abandoning the material
world, the destination to which each leads to and the rewards they
receive:
"Those who know the Supreme Brahman pass away from the world
during the influence of the fiery god, in the light, at an auspicious
moment, during the fortnight of the moon and the six months when
the sun travels in the north."
"The mystic who passes away from this world during the smoke, the
night, the moonlight fortnight, or in the six months when the sun
passes to the south, or who reaches the moon planet, again comes
baࢤ."

91
‫ ܍‬TAKE AWAYS
By remembering Lord KҬҴҘa in devotion throughout one's life,
and especially at the time of death, one can attain to His
supreme abode, beyond the material world.

CHAPTER 9
Krɧsɧnɧaȇs password
Krishna gives us His "password" for everything. It is just like our boss
gave us his ATM password. What is that password? Bhakti. That is
what opens Krishna's world.
"If one oॸers Me with love and devotion a leaf, a flower, a fruit or
water, I will accept it."
"Whatever you do, whatever you eat, whatever you oॸer or give
away, and whatever austerities you perform ١ do that, O son of
Kunti, as an oॸering to Me."
"In this way you will be freed from bondage to work and its
auspicious and inauspicious results. With your mind fixed on Me
in this principle of renunciation, you will be liberated and come to
Me."

After Krɧsɧnɧa answered Arjunaȇs
questions
He continues speaking, in Chapter Nine, the knowledge about
Himself that He had begun explaining in Chapter Seven.
Krishna thus prefaces Chapter Nine by stating that the knowledge
He'll now reveal is most confidential, for it is about His actual
position, which only the non-envious and faithful can understand.
Krishna continues explaining that although independent and aloof,
He pervades, creates and anihilates the entire cosmos through His
material energy.

94

CHAPTER 9

Those mahatmas who know Krishna as the Supreme Personality of
Godhead take shelter of Him and serve Him as the only enjoyer
and the supreme object of worship.

95

The most secret knowledge
Krishna, Origin and ultimate rest of everything:

Krishna then explains the fortunate position of such devotees: If one
worships Krishna, Krishna cares, compensates for his deficiencies, and
preserves his strengths:

"By Me, in My unmanifested form, this entire universe is pervaded.
All beings are in Me, but I am not in them."

"How much greater then are the brahmanas, the righteous, the
devotees and saintly kings who in this temporary miserable world
engage in loving service unto Me."

"And yet everything that is created does not rest in Me. Behold My
mystic opulence! Although I am the maintainer of all living entities,
and although I am everywhere, still My Self is the very source of
creation."

And all Krishna asks for is an oॸering of a leaf, a flower, or some
water ١ if it is oॸered with devotion. Thus His devotee comes to
Him:
"If one oॸers Me with love and devotion a leaf, a flower, fruit a
water, I will accept it."
"O son of Kunti, all that you do, all that you eat, all that you oॸer
and give away, as well as all austerities that you may perform,
should be done as an oॸering unto Me."
"In this way you will be freed from all reactions to good and evil
deeds, and by this principle of renunciation you will be liberated
and come to Me."
Even if a devotee unintentionally commits a horrendous act, he will
be rectified, for Krishna promises that His devotee will never perish:
"Even if one commits the most abominable actions, if he is engaged
in devotional service, he is to be considered saintly because he is
properly situated."
"He quiࢤly becomes righteous and attains lasting peace. O son of
Kunti, declare it boldly that My devotee never perishes."

Fools and wise
"Fools deride Me when I descend in the human form. They do not
know My transcendental nature and My supreme dominion over
all that be."
"O son of Prtha, those who are not deluded, the great souls, are
under the protection of the divine nature. They are fully engaged
in devotional service because they know Me as the Supreme Per-
sonality of Godhead, original and inexhaustible."

Manifestations of the Supreme Lord
"I am the father of this universe, the mother, the support, and the
grandsire. I am the object of knowledge, the purifier and the syllable
om. I am also the Rk, the Sama, and the Yajur Vedas ."
"I am the goal, the sustainer, the master, the witness, the abode,
the refuge and the most dear friend. I am the creation and the
annihilation, the basis of everything, the resting place and the
eternal seed."

96

CHAPTER 9

"O Arjuna, I control heat, the rain and the drought. I am immortal-
ity, and I am also death personified. Both being and nonbeing are
in Me."

Sacriȴces and worship
"Those who study the Vedas and drink the soma juice, seeking the
heavenly planets, worship Me indirectly. They take birth on the
planet of Indra, where they enjoy godly delights."
"But those who worship Me with devotion, meditating on My
transcendental form-to them I carry what they laࢤ and preserve
what they have."
"I am the only enjoyer and the only object of sacrifice. Those who
do not recognize My true transcendental nature fall down."

The special favor to a bhakta

CHAPTER 10
In this chapter, Krishna explains His opulences more specifically and
thereby reveals Himself as the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
the source of all. Krishna also tells how His pure devotees know that
He is the unborn Supreme Lord, the source of all sages, the source
of the material and spiritual worlds, and the source of all qualities
and attitudes.

The opulence of the Absolute
Krishna, Original Source and Repos of everything:
"I am the source of all spiritual and material worlds. Everything
emanates from Me. The wise who know this perfectly engage in
My devotional service and worship Me with all their hearts."
Devotion gives knowledge:

"I envy no one, nor am I partial to anyone. I am equal to all. But
whoever renders service unto Me in devotion is a friend, is in Me,
and I am also a friend to him."

"To those who are constantly devoted and worship Me with love, I
give the understanding by which they can come to Me."

‫ ܍‬TAKE AWAYS

Krishna, the Supreme:

KҬҴҘa is the Supreme Godhead and the supreme object of
worship. ࠭e soul is eternally related to Him through tran-
scendental devotional service bhakti . By reviving one's pure
devotion one returns to KҬҴҘa in the spiritual realm.

"O mighty conqueror of enemies, there is no end to My divine
manifestations. What I have spoken to you is but a mere indication
of My infinite opulences."

Manifestations of the Supreme Lord
"Know that all beautiful, glorious, and mighty creations spring from
but a spark of My splendor."

98

CHAPTER 10

Thus pure and wise devotees worship Krishna, converse about Him,
and with thoughts dwelling in Him, undeluded and free from sin,
engage in His service:
"The thoughts of My pure devotees dwell in Me, their lives are
surrendered to Me, and they derive great satisfaction and bliss
enlightening one another and conversing about Me."
Out of compassion, Krishna within their hearts destroys any remain-
ing ignorance:
"Out of compassion for them, I, dwelling in their hearts, destroy
with the shining lamp of knowledge the darkness born of igno-
rance."
After hearing of Krishna's opulences, Arjuna confirms Krishna as the
Supreme Lord by quoting authorities and explains that only Krishna
can truly know Himself:
"Arjuna said: You are the Supreme Brahman, the ultimate, the
supreme abode and purifier, the Absolute Truth and the eternal
divine person. You are the primal God, transcendental and original,
and You are the unborn and all-pervading beauty. All the great
sages such as Narada, Asita, Devala, and Vyasa proclaim this of
You, and now You Yourself are declaring it to me."
Krishna then tells of His divine manifestations within this world ١ as
the Supersoul, the ocean, the Himalayas ١ which merely indicate
His limitless opulences, for a single fragment of Krishna's energy
pervades and supports this entire universe!
All wondrous phenomena showing power, beauty, grandeur or
sublimity, either in the material world or in the spiritual, are but
partial manifestations of Krishna's divine energies and opulence. As
the supreme cause of all causes and the support and essence of
everything, Krishna is the supreme object of worship for all beings.

99
‫ ܍‬TAKE AWAYS
KҬҴҘa reveals Himself as the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
explaining His opulences and the devotion of pure and wise
devotees who worship Him as the source of all.
Arjuna, convinced of KҬҴҘa's supremacy, requests to witness
KҬҴҘa's all-pervading Universal Form, aanowledging that
KҬҴҘa is the unborn and Supreme Lord who, when known as
suࠪ, frees one from all sins.

CHAPTER 11
The Universal Form
Arjuna, although aࢤnowledging that Krishna in the two-armed form
that he now sees before him is Supreme, still requests Krishna to re-
veal that all-pervading Universal Form that supports the Universe:
"O greatest of all personalities, O supreme form, though I see here
before me Your actual position, I yet wish to see how You have
entered into this cosmic manifestation. I want to see that form of
Yours."
Lord Krishna grants Arjuna divine vision and reveals His spectacular
unlimited form as the cosmic universe:
"The Blessed Lord said: My dear Arjuna, O son of Prtha, behold
now My opulences, hundreds of thousands of varied divine forms,
multicolored like the sea."
Thus He conclusively establishes His divinity. Krishna explains that
His own all-beautiful humanlike form is the original form of
Godhead. One can perceive this form only by pure devotional
service.
In this Chapter Eleven, Krishna proves Himself as the Supreme Lord
and He establishes the criteria that anyone who claims to be God
must also show a Universal Form. Krishna then reveals to Arjuna His
wondrous eॸulgent, all-expansive form, and Arjuna sees all soldiers
on both sides dying within it:
"All the sons of Dhrtarastra along with their allied kings, and
Bhisma, Drona and Karna, and all our soldiers are rushing into Your
mouths, their heads smashed by Your fearful teeth. I see that some
are being crushed between Your teeth as well."

102

CHAPTER 11

103

Krishna explains His form as time, the destroyer of all worlds, and
requests that Arjuna, knowing in advance the inevitable death of
all the warriors, become His instrument:

may have done in madness or in love. I have dishonored You many
times while relaxing or while lying on the same bed or eating
together, sometimes alone and sometimes in front of many friends.
Please excuse me for all my oॸenses."

"The Blessed Lord said: Time I am, destroyer of the worlds, and
I have come to engage all people. With the exception of you the
Pandavas , all the soldiers here on both sides will be slain."
"Therefore get up and prepare to fight. After conquering your
enemies you will enjoy a flourishing kingdom. They are already
put to death by My arrangement, and you, O Savyasacin, can be
but an instmment in the fight."
In answer to Arjuna's fearful prayers, Krishna first shows His four-
armed form before again returning to His original two-armed form:
"O universal Lord, I wish to see You in Your four-armed form, with
helmeted head and with club, wheel, conch and lotus flower in Your
hands. I long to see You in that form."
Krishna then states that his two-armed form can only be seen by pure
devotees, and such pure devotees, working for Krishna, free from
desiring fruitive activities, and who make Krishna the goal of their
lives, certainly come to Him:
"The form which you are seeing with your transcendental eyes can-
not be understood simply by studying the Vedas, nor by undergoing
serious penances, nor by charity, nor by worship. It is not by these
means that one can see Me as I am."
His confusion was so strong that his bow and arrows fell from his
hand, and he could not perceive anything clearly. He was so afraid
that he begged pardon for his dealings with Krishna as an intimate
friend.
As a friend, Arjuna often behaved unceremoniously with the Lord,
and upon seeing the awesome universal form, Arjuna said:
"I have in the past addressed You as ٦O Krishna,' ٦O Yadava,' ٦O my
friend,' without knowing Your glories. Please forgive whatever I

Arjuna inquired from Krɧsɧnɧa
"Who are You?" The Lord presented Himself as kala, death per-
sonified. By nature's law, when there is an unwanted increase in
population, kala appears, and by some arrangement of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, people are killed wholesale in diॸerent
ways, by war, pestilence, famine and so on.
Although Krishna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the great-
est among all greats, still He remained with those royal brothers,
being attracted by their devotion, by their friendship and by their
love. That is the proof of how great this process of devotional service
is.
It can attract even the Supreme Personality of Godhead. God
is great, but devotional service is greater than God because it
attracts Him. People who are not in devotional service can never
understand what great value there is in rendering service to the
Lord.
Arjuna requested that Krishna to show His universal form, because
he knew that "I am accepting Krishna as the Supreme, but there are
many persons with poor fund of knowledge, they may not accept."
Therefore he requested Krishna to show him the universal form:
"If You think that I am able to behold Your cosmic form, O my Lord,
O master of all mystic power, then kindly show me that universal
self."
The philosophical take is that the universal form of God, is every-
thing within the universe, but Krishna is even more than that whole
complete universal form. He is the origin of that universal form.

104

CHAPTER 11

Arjuna understood that although Krishna was his friend, He was the
Supreme Personality of Godhead and therefore the proper person
to be his guru.
He therefore told Krishna at the beginning of Bhagavad-gita 2.7 ,
"sisyas te 'ham sadhi mam tvam prapannam"
"Now I am Your disciple and a soul surrendered unto You. Please
instruct me."
Non-devotees think that because Krishna says, "I am God," they and
everyone else can say the same. But if asked to show their universal
form, they cannot do it. That is the diॸerence between a pseudo god
and the real God.

105

Fighting Demotivation
"Therefore get up and prepare to fight. After conquering your
enemies you will enjoy a flourishing kingdom. They are already
put to death by My arrangement, and you, 0 Savyasacin, can be but
an instrument in the fight."

Asking for forgiveness

The Universal Form of the Lord which includes all diversities of
matter beginning from Brahma to the ant, is but one-fourth portion
of the inconceivable mystic powers of the Lord.

"You are the Supreme Lord, to he worshiped by every living being.
Thus I fall down to oॸer You my respects and ask Your mercy. Please
tolerate the wrongs that I may have done to You and hear with me
as a father with his son, or a friend with his friend, or a lover with
his beloved."

The gigantic universal form of the Lord called adhidaivatam is
contemplated by the neophyte who cannot approach the Supreme
Lord in His manifestation as Supersoul.

Fear

Advanced spiritualist is everyoneȇs
friend

"Sa³jaya said to Dhrtarashtra: The Supreme Personality of God-
head, Krishna, while speaking thus to Arjuna, displayed His real four-
armed form, and at last He showed him His two-armed form, thus
encouraging the fearful Arjuna."

"My dear Arjuna, he who engages in My pure devotional service,
free from the contaminations of fruitive activities and mental
speculation, he who works for Me, who makes Me the supreme goal
of his life, and who is friendly to every living being ١ he certainly
comes to Me."

‫ ܍‬TAKE AWAYS
KҬҴҘa grants Arjuna's wish and reveals His universal form,
demonstrating His divinity and establishing criteria for recog-
nizing the true God.
Arjuna, initially fearful and confused, aanowledges KҬҴҘa's
greatness and seeks forgiveness for his past behavior. ࠭is
ࠪapter emphasizes the signiࣧcance of devotional service, with
Arjuna recognizing KҬҴҘa as the Supreme Lord and requesting
guidance as his guru.

CHAPTER 12
The dearest worker
In this Chapter, Lord Krishna extols the glory of true devotion to God
and explains the diॸerent forms of spiritual disciplines.
Bhakti-yoga, pure devotional service to Lord Krishna, is the highest
and most expedient means for attaining pure love for Krishna, which
is the highest end of spiritual existence. Those who follow this
supreme path develop divine qualities.
Arjuna, after witnessing Krishna's awesome Universal Form, wishes
to clarify his own position as a devotee, the highest worshiper of
the Supreme.
He thus asks whether worshiping Krishna through devotional ser-
vice or worshiping the impersonal is superior. Krishna immediately
responds saying that one engaged in His personal service is the
topmost:
"The Blessed Lord said: He whose mind is fixed on My personal
form, always engaged in worshiping Me with great and transcen-
dental faith, is considered by Me to be most perfect."
One should therefore engage in Krishna's service and fix his mind
solely upon Krishna, and, if that cannot be done, one should follow
the rules and regulations of ٦bhakti-yoga', which purify one so he
is later able to do so.
Krishna then describes other processes that eventually lead to His
pure devotional service:
"But those who fully worship the unmanifested, that which lies be-
yond the perception of the senses, the all-pervading, inconceivable,

108

CHAPTER 12

109

fixed, and immovable-the impersonal conception of the Absolute
Truth-by controlling the various senses and being equally disposed
to everyone, such persons, engaged in the welfare of all, at last
achieve Me."

any residence, who is fixed in knowledge and who is engaged in
devotional service ١ such a person is very dear to Me."

There are qualities that endear a devotee to Krishna, which Krishna
next mentions, such as equality in both happiness and distress,
independence from the ordinary course of activities, satisfaction,
and the faithful following of the path of devotional service, are also
part of the process of worshiping Krishna in devotional service:
"For one who worships Me, giving up all his activities unto Me
and being devoted to Me without deviation, engaged in devotional
service and always meditating upon Me, who has fixed his mind
upon Me, O son of Prtha, for him I am the swift deliverer from the
ocean of birth and death."
"One who is not envious but who is a kind friend to all living
entities, who does not think himself a proprietor, who is free from
false ego and equal both in happiness and distress, who is always
satisfied and engaged in devotional service with determination and
whose mind and intelligence are in agreement with Me-he is very
dear to Me."
The last four verses tell us how we can become dear, very dear, or
dearest worker to Krishna:
"My devotee who is not dependent on the ordinary course of
activities, who is pure, expert, without cares, free from all pains,
and not striving for some result, is very dear to Me."
"One who neither rejoices nor grieves, who neither laments nor de-
sires, and who renounces both auspicious and inauspicious things
١ such a devotee is very dear to Me."
"One who is equal to friends and enemies, who is equipoised in
honor and dishonor, heat and cold, happiness and distress, fame
and infamy, who is always free from contaminating association,
always silent and satisfied with anything, who doesn't care for

"Those who follow this imperishable path of devotional service
and who completely engage themselves with faith, making Me the
supreme goal, are very, very dear to Me."

Krɧsɧnɧa is a nice Ȋbossȋ. Ζf you canȇt do
this, do that
"Just fix your mind upon Me, the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
and engage all your intelligence in Me. Thus you will live in Me
always, without a doubt."
"My dear Arjuna, O winner of wealth, if you cannot fix your mind
upon Me without deviation, then follow the regulative principles
of bhakti-yoga. In this way develop a desire to attain Me."
"If you cannot practice the regulations of bhakti-yoga, then just try
to work for Me, because by working for Me you will come to the
perfect stage."
"If, however, you are unable to work in this consciousness of Me,
then try to act giving up all results of your work and try to be self-
situated."
"If you cannot take to this practice, then engage yourself in the
cultivation of knowledge. Better than knowledge, however, is med-
itation, and better than meditation is renunciation of the fruits of
action, for by such renunciation one can attain peace of mind."
‫ ܍‬TAKE AWAYS
KҬҴҘa emphasizes the signiࣧcance of true devotion to God,
highlighting that pure devotional service to Him, known as
Bhakti-yoga, is the most eࣦective means for attaining pure love
and divine qualities.

110

CHAPTER 12

࠭e subsequent verses explain that being free from envy, pos-
sessing equanimity in pleasure and pain, and engaging in
devotional service with determination make one dear to KҬҴҘa,
oࣦering a gradual path towards the highest devotion.

CHAPTER 13
The lawyer in the heart
Paramatma
In this Chapter, Lord Krishna shows us the diॸerence between the
physical body and the immortal soul - the transitory and the
perishable, versus the immutable and the eternal.
Arjuna opens by inquiring about the field of activities and the
knower of that field. Krishna answers that the conditioned soul's
body and that body's interactions within the material world are
His limited field of activities:
"Arjuna said: O my dear Krishna, I wish to know about prakrti
nature , Purusa the enjoyer , and the field and the knower of the
field, and of knowledge and the end of knowledge. The Blessed Lord
then said: This body, O son of Kunti, is called the field, and one who
knows this body is called the knower of the field."
"O scion of Bharata, you should understand that I am also the
knower in all bodies, and to understand this body and its owner
is called knowledge. That is My opinion."
By understanding the diॸerence between the body, the soul, and
the Supersoul and by following the process of knowledge, the soul
can transcend the good and the bad he meets, realize his eternal
subordination to Krishna, and attain the supreme destination.
This Thirteenth Chapter clearly explains that by humbly developing
knowledge one can become free from material entanglement. It
is also explained that the living entity's entanglement within the
material world due to his association with the modes of material
nature:

112

CHAPTER 13

"Material nature and the living entities should be understood to be
beginningless. Their transformations and the modes of matter are
products of material nature."

113

Loneliness

"Nature is said to be the cause of all material activities and eॸects,
whereas the living entity is the cause of the various suॸerings and
enjoyments in this world."

"The Supreme Truth exists both internally and externally, in the
moving and nonmoving. He is beyond the power of the material
senses to see or to know. Although far, far away, He is also near to
all."

"The living entity in material nature thus follows the ways of life,
enjoying the three modes of nature. This is due to his association
with that material nature. Thus he meets with good and evil
amongst various species."

"He is the source of light in all luminous objects. He is beyond the
darkness of matter and is unmanifested. He is knowledge, He is the
object of knowledge, and He is the goal of knowledge. He is situated
in everyone's heart."
‫ ܍‬TAKE AWAYS

Two birds on a tree
Paramatma, the Lord in the heart is accompanying the individual
soul:
"Yet in this body there is another, a transcendental enjoyer, who is
the Lord, the supreme proprietor, who exists as the overseer and
permitter, and who is known as the Supersoul."
"One who sees the Supersoul accompanying the individual soul
in all bodies and who understands that neither the soul nor the
Supersoul is ever destroyed, actually sees."
One who understands the diॸerence between the body, the soul
and the Supersoul beyond them both attains liberation from this
material world:
"Those with the vision of eternity can see that the soul is transcen-
dental, eternal, and beyond the modes of nature. Despite contact
with the material body, O Arjuna, the soul neither does anything
nor is entangled."

KҬҴҘa elucidates the distinction between the perishable physi-
cal body and the immortal soul, emphasizing the soul's eternal
nature and its transcendence over material entanglements.
By comprehending the diࣦerence between the body, the soul,
and the Supersoul, and through the pursuit of knowledge, one
can attain liberation from the material world and recognize
their eternal subordination to KҬҴҘa.

CHAPTER 14
The prison bars
In this Chapter, Lord Krishna advises Arjuna to relinquish ignorance
and passion and how everyone can adopt the path of pure goodness
to acquire the ability to transcend them all.
There are three Prison Bars modes , and Krishna explains the bars
and gives us the tools by which to cut them. He explains the three
modes ١ goodness, passion and ignorance ١ those forces that bind
and control all conditioned souls within this world. A soul can,
however, transcend these modes through devotional service. All
other processes are contaminated by the modes.

The three gunas
Virtue, Passion and Ζgnorance.
All embodied souls are under the control of the three modes, or
qualities, of material nature: goodness, passion, and ignorance:
"Material nature consists of the three modes-goodness, passion and
ignorance. When the living entity comes in contact with nature, he
becomes conditioned by these modes."
Lord Krishna explains what these modes are, how they act upon
us, how one transcends them, and the symptoms of one who has
attained the transcendental state.
Thus the limitations imposed by his field of activities can be
overthrown and the soul can be elevated to the Brahman platform,

116

CHAPTER 14

the constitutional position of purity and happiness ١ a platform of
which Krishna is the basis:
"And I am the basis of the impersonal Brahman, which is the con-
stitutional position of ultimate happiness, and which is immortal,
imperishable and eternal."
‫ ܍‬TAKE AWAYS
KҬҴҘa advises Arjuna to transcend ignorance and passion by
adopting the path of pure goodness, explaining the three modes
‫ ـ‬goodness, passion, and ignorance ‫ ـ‬that bind and control
conditioned souls.
KҬҴҘa reveals the process of freeing oneself from the material
world's grip, likening it to an upside-down banyan tree, and
emphasizes that knowing Him as the Supreme Personality of
Godhead and engaging in His service is the ultimate purpose
of Vedanta.

CHAPTER 15
The Scape Plan
In this Chapter, Lord Krishna reveals the transcendental characteris-
tics of the omnipotent, omniscient and omnipresent and explains
the purpose and value of knowing and realizing God.
The scape plan map is The Vedas. Vedas give you the scape plan:
where are the guards etc.
In this chapter, auspicious, elevating activities are described as part
of the banyan tree.
The ultimate purpose of Vedic knowledge is to detach one self from
the entanglement of the material world and to understand Krishna as
the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
One who understands Krishna ٦s supreme identity surrenders unto
Him and engages in His devotional service:
"One who is free from illusion, false prestige, and false association,
who understands the eternal, who is done with material lust and is
freed from the duality of happiness and distress, and who knows
how to surrender unto the Supreme Person, attains to that eternal
kingdom."

Forgetfulness
"I am seated in everyone's heart, and from Me come remembrance,
knowledge and forgetfulness. By all the Vedas am I to he known;
indeed I am the compiler of Vedanta, and I am the knower of the
Vedas."

118

CHAPTER 15

As one must be detached from the modes and their results in order
to be attached to the service of the Lord, Krishna describes in Chapter
Fifteen the process of freeing oneself from matter's grip.
He begins by comparing the material world to a gigantic, upside-
down banyan tree, invoking Arjuna to detach himself from it
through surrender. Thus, the soul can end his transmigrations and
return to Him in the spiritual world.

119

Conditioned by happiness
"0 sinless one, the mode of goodness, being purer than the others, is
illuminating, and it frees one from all sinful reactions. Those situ-
ated in that mode develop knowledge, hut they become conditioned
by the concept of happiness."

Although the foolish cannot understand that the soul transmigrates,
quitting one body to obtain a new body based on his mind's desires,
transcendentalists see this clearly.

Grief, ignorance and knowledge

The foolish can learn to see properly by understanding that it is
Krishna who is the splendor of the sun, moon, and fire, as the one
keeping the planets in orbit and making vegetables succulent.

From the mode of goodness, real knowledge develops; from the
mode of passion, grief develops; and from the mode of ignorance,
foolishness, madness and illusion develop.

They can see Krishna as the fire of digestion; as the Paramatma in
everyone's heart; as the giver of remembrance, knowledge, and
forgetfulness; and as the goal of the Vedas and the compiler of
Vedanta:

‫ ܍‬TAKE AWAYS

"I am seated in everyone's heart, and from Me come remembrance,
knowledge and forgetfulness. By all the Vedas am I to be known;
indeed I am the compiler of Vedanta, and I am the knower of the
Vedas."

࠭e ultimate goal of Vedic knowledge is to attain detaࠪment
from the material world and recognize KҬҴҘa as the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, leading to surrender and engagement
in devotional service.

Elevation beyond the gunas
Krishna then reveals that knowing Him as the Supreme Personality
of Godhead and engaging in His service is the ultimate purpose of
the Vedanta and the most confidential part of the Vedas:
"Because I am transcendental, beyond both the fallible and the
infallible, and because I am the greatest, I am celebrated both in
the world and in the Vedas as that Supreme Person."

KҬҴҘa reveals the transcendental ࠪaracteristics of God and
emphasizes the signiࣧcance of understanding and realizing
Him, with the Vedas serving as the comprehensive guide.

CHAPTER 16
In this Chapter, Krishna explains in detail the divine properties,
conduct and actions which are righteous in nature and conducive
to divinity while delineating the evil and ill conducts.

Divine and evil natures
"The Blessed Lord said: Fearlessness, purification of one's existence,
cultivation of spiritual knowledge, charity, self-control, perfor-
mance of sacrifice, study of the Vedas, austerity and simplicity;
nonviolence, truthfulness, freedom from anger; renunciation, tran-
quility, aversion to fault finding, compassion and freedom from
covetousness; gentleness, modesty and steady determination; vigor,
forgiveness, fortitude, cleanliness, free dom from envy and the
passion for honor-these transcendental qualities, 0 son of Bharata,
belong to godly men endowed with divine nature."
After mentioning twenty-six godly qualities, Krishna explains the de-
moniac nature which degrades the soul through arrogant, ignorant,
and conceited pursuits of sense gratification and power.
Krishna explains the demonic mentality as follows:
"They say that this world is unreal, that there is no foundation and
that there is no God in control. It is produced of sex desire, and has
no cause other than lust."
While plotting to kill their ٦competitor' enemies, they think them-
selves powerful and happy, and they, surrounded by their relatives,
use sacrifices and charity only to further increase their happiness.
"Perplexed by illusory anxieties, bewildered by self-complacency,
impudency, and wealth; and envying the Supersoul within their

122

CHAPTER 16

123

own bodies and within the bodies of others, demons blaspheme
real religion."

Greed and lust

"These mischievous, lowest amongst men are repeatedly cast by
Krishna into demonic species to gradually sink to the most abom-
inable forms of existence."

"There are three gates leading to this hell-lust, anger, and greed. Ev-
ery sane man should give these up, for they lead to the degradation
of the soul."

Dealing with envy

Right conduct in jail

"Those who are envious and mischievous, who are the lowest
among men, are cast by Me into the ocean of material existence,
into various demoniac species of life."

The inmates

Pride
"Arrogance, pride, anger, conceit, harshness and ignorance-these
qualities belong to those of demonic nature, 0 son of Prtha."
"The demoniac person thinks: "So much wealth do I have today, and
I will gain more according to my schemes. So much is mine now,
and it will increase in the future, more and more."
"He is my enemy, and I have killed him; and my other enemy will
also be killed. I am the lord of everything, I am the enjoyer, I am
perfect, powerful and happy. I am the richest man, surrounded by
aristocratic relatives."
"There is none so powerful and happy as I am. I shall perform
sacrifices, I shall give some charity, and thus I shall rejoice." In this
way, such persons are deluded by ignorance."

The inmates in this prison are the baddies and the not so bad.
Associate with the goodies to go out sooner.
Krishna ends the chapter by explaining that because lust, anger and
greed are the beginnings of demonic life, all sane men should
therefore give them up and understand their duty through faithfully
following the scriptures.
Krishna has concluded Chapter Sixteen by declaring that the ultimate
diॸerence between the divine and the demoniac is that the divine
follow the scriptures while the demons do not:
"But he who discards scriptural injunctions and acts according to
his own whims attains neither perfection, nor happiness, nor the
supreme destination."
Those who possess demoniac qualities and who live whimsically,
without following the regulations of scripture, attain lower births
and further material bondage.
But those who possess divine qualities and regulated lives, abiding
by scriptural authority, gradually attain spiritual perfection.
‫ ܍‬TAKE AWAYS
KҬҴҘa delineates divine and demoniac natures, emphasizing
righteous conduct, godly qualities, and the consequences of

124

CHAPTER 16

demonic pursuits suࠪ as arrogance, ignorance, and sense grat-
iࣧcation.
KҬҴҘa concludes by highlighting the importance of forsaking
lust, anger, and greed to understand one's duty through scrip-
ture and aࠪieve spiritual perfection.

CHAPTER 17
The Prison Key
The prison key, the easiest way to get out of the jail is outlined in
the last four verses and purports of this chapter.
In the beginning of Chapter Seventeen, Arjuna inquires more about
those who don't follow scriptures, but who worship according to
their imaginations:
"Arjuna said, O Krishna, what is the situation of one who does not
follow the principles of scripture but worships according to his own
imagination? Is he in goodness, in passion or in ignorance?"
Krishna answers by describing how the combination of the modes
of material nature that control a particular person will dictate a
person's faith, worship, eating, sacrifices, charity and austerity:
"The Supreme Lord said, according to the modes of nature acquired
by the embodied soul, one's faith can be of three kinds-goodness,
passion or ignorance. Now hear about these."

The three types of material
existence
In this Chapter, Krishna tells us about the three divisions of faith and
how these diॸerent qualities determine that character of human
beings and their consciousness in this world. It is a more detailed
description of the 14 and 15 Chapters.
Everything belongs to the Lord, thus everything should be oॸered
to the Lord. If you live by that, you are free. That is the key.

126

CHAPTER 17

The Bhagavad gita ends in 17 Chapters, but if you cannot put in
practice the teachings or does not understand, then go to Chapter
18. If nothing is working so far, go to Chapter 18.

The branches of faith
There are three types of faith, corresponding to and evolving from
the three modes of material nature.
• Acts performed by those whose faith is in passion and igno-
rance yield only impermanent, material results,
• Whereas acts performed in goodness, in accord with scrip-
tural injunctions, purify the heart and lead to pure faith in
Lord Krishna and devotion to Him.
The chapter ends with Krishna explaining the syllables ٦om tat sat'
and how these syllables indicate that any sacrifice, austerity, or
charity dictated by the modes and performed without devotional
service is useless in this life and the next.

Om Tat Sat
"Thus the transcendentalists undertake sacrifices, charities, and
penances, beginning always with om, to attain the Supreme."
"One should perform sacrifice, penance and charity with the word
tat. The purpose of such transcendental activities is to get free from
the material entanglement."
"The Absolute Truth is the objective of devotional sacrifice, and it
is indicated by the word sat. These works of sacrifice, of penance
and of charity, true to the absolute nature, are performed to please
the Supreme Person, O son of Prtha."

127

Asat
"But sacrifices, austerities and charities performed without faith
in the Supreme are nonpermanent, O son of Prtha, regardless of
whatever rites are performed. They are called asat and are useless
both in this life and the next."
‫ ܍‬TAKE AWAYS
Arjuna questions KҬҴҘa about those who don't follow scrip-
tures but worship based on their imagination. KҬҴҘa explains
how the modes of material nature inࣨuence a person's faith,
worship, and actions.
࠭e ࠪapter emphasizes the three types of material existence
and concludes with KҬҴҘa highlighting the importance of dedi-
cating all actions to the Lord for true freedom.

CHAPTER 18
ȊFollow Meȋ
The main message in this Chapter is, if all else fails "follow Me."
Krishna summarizes the takeaways from the previous chapters and
describes the attainment of salvation by the paths of karma and
jnana yoga. Arjuna learns to discriminate nectar from poison and
returns to war.
Krishna explains the meaning of renunciation and the eॸects of the
modes of nature on human consciousness and activity.
He explains Brahman realization, the glories of the Bhagavad-gita,
and the ultimate conclusion of the Gita: the highest path of religion
is absolute, unconditional loving surrender unto Lord Krishna. That
frees one from all sins, brings to complete enlightenment, and
enables to return to Krishna's eternal spiritual abode.

The ȴve factors of the action
"O mighty-armed Arjuna, according to the Vedanta there are five
causes for the accomplishment of all action. Now learn of these
from Me."
"The place of action the body , the performer, the various senses,
the many diॸerent kinds of endeavor, and ultimately the Supersoul
١ these are the five factors of action."
"Whatever right or wrong action a man performs by body, mind or
speech is caused by these five factors."

130

CHAPTER 18

"Therefore one who thinks himself the only doer, not considering
the five factors, is certainly not very intelligent and cannot see
things as they are."

131

Confusion and forgetfulness
"The Supreme Lord is situated in everyone's heart, 0 Arjuna, and is
directing the wanderings of all living entities‫ٴ‬"

Ζntelligence and determination
"One who performs his duty without association with the modes
of material nature, without false ego, with great determination and
enthusiasm, and without wavering in success or failure is said to
be a worker in the mode of goodness."

The three kinds of happiness
"O best of the Bharatas, now please hear from Me about the three
kinds of happiness by which the conditioned soul enjoys, and by
which he sometimes comes to the end of all distress."
"That which in the beginning may be just like poison but at the end
is just like nectar and which awakens one to self-realization is said
to be happiness in the mode of goodness."
"That happiness which is derived from contact of the senses with
their objects and which appears like nectar at first but poison at the
end is said to be of the nature of passion."
"And that happiness which is blind to self-realization, which is delu-
sion from beginning to end and which arises from sleep, laziness
and illusion is said to be of the nature of ignorance."

Dealing with envy
"And one who listens with faith and without envy becomes free
from sinful reaction and attains to the planets where the pious
dwell."

Demotivated
"Every endeavor is covered by some sort of fault, just as fire is
covered by smoke. Therefore one should not give up the work which
is born of his nature, 0 son of Kunti, even if such work is full of fault."
"Wherever there is Krishna, the master of all mystics, and wherever
there is Arjuna, the supreme archer, there will also certainly be
opulence, victory, extraordinary power, and morality. That is my
opinion."

Pridelessness
"The worker who is free from all material attachments and false ego,
who is enthusiastic and resolute and who is indiॸerent to success
or failure, is a worker in the mode of goodness."
"If you become conscious of Me, you will pass over all the obstacles
of conditional life by My grace. If, however, you do not work in

132

CHAPTER 18

133

such consciousness but act through false ego, not hearing Me, you
will be lost."

opulence, victory, extraordinary power, and morality. That is my
opinion."

"The Supreme Lord is situated in everyone's heart, 0 Arjuna, and is
directing the wanderings of all living entities, who are seated as on
a machine, made of the material energy."

The entire Bhagavad-gita is concluded in seventeen chapters and
in the Eighteen Chapter, Krishna reviews the knowledge already pre-
sented. In this chapter Krishna concludes, as He has done througout
the Bhagavad-gita, that one should practice devotional service ١
Krishna conciousness.

Fear
"O son of Prtha, that understanding by which one knows what
ought to be done and what ought not to be done, what is to be feared
and what is not to be feared, what is binding and what is liberating,
that understanding is established in the mode of goodness."

Laziness
"And that happiness which is blind to self-realization, which is delu-
sion from beginning to end and which arises from sleep, laziness
and illusion is said to be of the nature of ignorance."

Feeling shameful and losing hope
"Abandon all varieties of religion and just surrender unto Me. I shall
deliver you from all sinful reaction. Do not fear."

Demotivated and losing hope
"Wherever there is Krishna, the master of all mystics, and wherever
there is Arjuna, the supreme archer, there will also certainly be

If instructions on chapters 15, 16 and 17 do not work or you can't
do it, Krishna says "just follow Me."
"sarva dharman paritjyaija"
Vraja means go. Just follow Me, don't worry.
It is like a lawyer comes to our rescue. All crimes will be purified,
the reasons you are in jail will be cleared, forget about all dharmas,
just hold to Krishna instructions, guidance, lotus feet and you will be
free, you will get moksha.
Krishna is our Lawyer 24/7. He shows you how to cut the bars, gives
you the map, the plan of the prison house, with whom you should
associate with, and the key.
And if everything fails: "just follow Me and you will be OK."

Duty
"O Arjuna, when one performs his prescribed duty only because
it ought to be done, and renounces all material association and all
attachment to the fruit, his renunciation is said to be in the mode
of goodness."

134

CHAPTER 18

135

The perfect renunciation

Most conȴdential knowledge

Since Arjuna's basic desire to renounce his duty of fighting was
fear of sinful reaction, Krishna explains true renunciation and how
to transcend sinful reactions through.

Krishna can only be known through surrendering to Him in devo-
tional service, and by this direct process ١ free from karma or jnana,
Arjuna should need not fear any sinful reactions. Under Krishna's
protection, such a pure devotee will reach "Krishna-loka":

Becoming renounced from the fruits of activities:
"The Supreme Lord said, To give up the results of all activities is
called renunciation tyaga by the wise. And that state is called the
renounced order of life sannyasa by great learned men."
"All these activities should be performed without any expectation
of result. They should be performed as a matter of duty, O son of
Prtha. That is My final opinion."
Worshiping the Lord through one's fruits of work by acting either
as ٦brahmana', ٦ksatriya', etc.:
"But he who performs his prescribed duty only because it ought to
be done, and renounces all attachment to the fruit-his renunciation
is of the nature of goodness, O Arjuna."

"Abandon all varieties of religion and just surrender unto Me. I shall
deliver you from all sinful reaction. Do not fear."
"If you become conscious of Me, you will pass over all the obstacles
of conditional life by My grace. If, however, you do not work in
such consciousness but act through false ego, not hearing Me, you
will be lost."
Krishna instructs Arjuna that he should surrender to the Supreme
Lord within his heart and thus attain peace in His supreme, eternal
abode. The most confidential knowledge is then explained by Krishna:
"Become My devotee, always think of Me, act for Me, worship Me,
and oॸer all homage unto Me. Surrender unto Me alone. Do not
fear sinful reactions."

"By worship of the Lord, who is the source of all beings and who is
all-pervading, man can, in the performance of his own duty, attain
perfection."

After hearing the instructions of Sri Krishna, Arjuna is fixed and
ready to fight:

Thus, one can achieve the self-realized position of ٦brahma-bhuta'
and that position, detached from all material things, one can
practice pure devotional service:

"Arjuna said, My dear Krishna, O infallible one, my illusion is now
gone. I have regained my memory by Your mercy, and I am now
firm and free from doubt and am prepared to act according to Your
instructions."

"O scion of Bharata, surrender unto Him utterly. By His grace
you will attain transcendental peace and the supreme and eternal
abode."
"One who is thus transcendentally situated at once realizes the
Supreme Brahman. He never laments nor desires to have anything;
he is equally disposed to every living entity. In that state he attains
pure devotional service unto Me."

Sanjaya, after narrating this conversation to Dhritarashtra, ecstati-
cally thinks of the wondrous two-armed form of Krishna and predicts
victory for Arjuna, the supreme archer, for he is surrendered to
Krishna, the master of all mystics:
"Sanjaya said: Thus have I heard the conversation of two great souls,
Krishna and Arjuna. And so wonderful is that message that my hair
is standing on end."

136

CHAPTER 18

137

"O King, when I remember the wonderful form of Lord Krishna, I am
struࢤ with even greater wonder, and I rejoice again and again."

of unconditional loving surrender to Lord KҬҴҘa for spiritual
freedom.

"Wherever there is Krishna, the master of all mystics, and wherever
there is Arjuna, the supreme archer, there will also certainly be
opulence, victory, extraordinary power, and morality. That is my
opinion."

Surrender to the Supreme Lord
The Gita ends with Krishna telling Arjuna he must choose the path of
good or evil, as it his his duty to fight the Kauravas for his kingdom.
In that, he is correcting the balance of good and evil, fulfilling his
dharma, and oॸering the deepest form of selfless service. Arjuna
understands and, with that, proceeds into battle.
It is appropriately the longest discourse in the poem. It deals
particularly with the relationship between knowledge jnana and
action karma , which is what Arjuna needs to know in order to
choose wisely among the options facing him, that is, in order to
discriminate.
‫ ܍‬TAKE AWAYS
KҬҴҘa emphasizes the importance of surrendering to Him in
devotional service, outlining the paths of karma and jnana
yoga for attaining salvation. Arjuna learns to discern right and
wrong actions based on the ࣧve factors inࣨuencing all deeds.
KҬҴҘa underscores the signiࣧcance of performing duties with-
out attaࠪment, aࠪieving true renunciation, and ultimately
surrendering to Him for liberation, while highlighting the
interplay between knowledge and action.
࠭e Gita concludes with KҬҴҘa advising Arjuna to ࠪoose the
path of righteousness and fulࣧll his duty in the battle against
the Kauravas, ultimately stressing the supreme importance

By Theme
In alphabetical order

Achievements
Bg 2.8
I can find no means to drive away this grief which is drying up my
senses. I will not be able to destroy it even if I win an unrivalled
kingdom on the earth with sovereignty like the demigods in heaven.
Bg 18.49
One can obtain the results of renunciation simply by self-control
and by becoming unattached to material things and disregarding
material enjoy ments. That is the highest perfectional stage of
renunciation.
Bg 13.28
One who sees the Supersoul accompanying the individual soul in all
bodies and who understands that neither the soul nor the Supersoul
is ever destroyed, actually sees.
Bg 2.5
It is better to live in this world by begging than to live at the cost
of the lives of great souls who are my teachers. Even though they
are avaricious, they are nonetheless superiors. If they are killed, our
spoils will be tainted with blood.
Bg 10.36
I am also the gambling of cheats, and of the splendid I am the
splendor. I am victory, I am adventure, and I am the strength of
the strong.

140

By Theme

141

Ambition

Anger

Bg 3.7
On the other hand, he who controls the senses by the mind and
engages his active organs in works of devotion, without attachment,
is by far superior.
Bg 12.5
For those whose minds are attached to the unmanifested, imper-
sonal feature of the Supreme, advancement is very troublesome. To
make progress in that discipline is always diॻcult for those who
are embodied.
Bg 14.7
The mode of passion is born of unlimited desires and longings, O
son of Kunti and because of this one is bound to material fruitive
activities.
Bg 14.8
O son of Bharata, know that the mode of darkness, born of igno-
rance, causes deception of all embodied living entities. The results
of this modality are madness, indolence and sleep, which bind the
conditioned soul.
Bg 3.39
Thus, a man's pure consciousness is covered by his eternal enemy
in the form of lust, which is never satisfied and which burns like
fire.
Bg 3.9
Work done as a sacrifice for Visnu has to be performed, otherwise
work binds one to this material world. Therefore, O son of Kunti,
perform your prescribed duties for His satisfaction, and in that way
you will always remain unattached and free from bondage.
Bg 14.26
One who engages in full devotional service, who does not fall down
in any circumstance, at once transcends the modes of material
nature and thus comes to the level of Brahman.

Bg 2.56
One who is not disturbed in spite of the threefold miseries, who
is not elated when there is happiness, and who is free from
attachment, fear and anger, is called a sage of steady mind.
Bg 2.62
While contemplating the objects of the senses, a person develops
attachment for them, and from such attachment lust develops, and
from lust anger arises.
Bg 2.63
From anger, delusion arises, and from delusion bewilderment of
memory. When memory is bewildered, intelligence is lost, and
when intelligence is lost, one falls down again into the material
pool.

Boss
Bg 9.22
But those who worship Me with devotion, meditating on My
transcendental form-to them I carry what they laࢤ and preserve
what they have.
Bg 18.61
The Supreme Lord is situated in everyone's heart, O Arjuna, and is
directing the wanderings of all living entities, who are seated as on
a machine, made of the material energy.
Bg 18.62
O scion of Bharata, surrender unto Him utterly. By His grace you
will attain transcendental peace and the supreme and eternal abode.
Bg 18.58
If you become conscious of Me, you will pass over all the obstacles
of conditional life by My grace. If, however, you do not work in
such consciousness but act through false ego, not hearing Me, you

142

By Theme

will be lost.
Bg 17.15
Austerity of speech consists in speaking truthfully and beneficially
and in avoiding speech that oॸends. One should also recite the
Vedas regularly..

Brothers
Bg 1.36
Sin will overcome us if we slay such aggressors. Therefore it is not
proper for us to kill the sons of Dhrtarashtra and our friends. What
should we gain, O Krishna, husband of the goddess of fortune, and
how could we be happy by killing our own kinsmen?
Bg 1.1
Dhrtarashtra said: O Sanjaya, after assembling in the place of
pilgrimage at Kurukshetra, what did my sons and the sons of Pandu
do, being desirous to fight?
Bg 1.37-38
O Janardana, although these men, overtaken by greed, see no fault
in killing one's family or quarreling with friends, why should we,
with knowledge of the sin, engage in these acts?
Bg 3.11
The demigods, being pleased by sacrifices, will also please you; thus
nourishing one another, there will reign general prosperity for all.
Bg 3.21
Whatever action is performed by a great man, common men follow
in his footsteps. And whatever standards he sets by exemplary acts,
all the world pursues.

143

Children
Bg 6.32
O Arjuna, he who, by comparison with his own self, sees the true
equality of all beings in their happiness as well as in their aॼiction,
is a perfec tyogi.
Bg 9.5 And yet all that is created does not rest in Me.Therein lies
My mystical opulence! Although I am the sustainer of all living
entities and although I am everywhere, I am not part of this cosmic
manifestation, for My Being is the very source of creation.
Bg 9.17
I am the father of this universe, the mother, the sustainer and the
grandfather. I am the object of knowledge, the purifier and the
syllable oҪ. I am also the Vedas Ӄg, Sama and Yajur.
Bg 11.43
You are the father of all this cosmic manifestation, of the mobile
and the immobile.Thou art its revered chief, the supreme spiritual
master. None is greater than Thou, nor can any be one with Thee,
O Lord of immeasurable power, how, then, can there be anyone
superior to You in the three worlds?
Bg 13.9
Perception of the bad of birth, death, old age and disease; being
free from the entanglement of children, wife, home and so forth;
equanimity in the midst of pleasant and unpleasant events.

Competence
Bg 2.3
O son of Prtha, do not yield to this degrading impotence. It does
not become you. Give up such petty weakness of heart and arise, O
chastiser of the enemy.
Bg 2.63
From anger, delusion arises, and from delusion bewilderment of

144

By Theme

145

memory. When memory is bewildered, intelligence is lost, and
when intelligence is lost, one falls down again into the material
pool.
Bg 6.35
The Blessed Lord said: O mighty-armed son of Kunti, it is undoubt-
edly very diॻcult to curb the restless mind, but it is possible by
constant practice and by detachment.
Bg 6.45
Y cuando el yogi se esfuerza sinceramente por progresar m£s y
se limpia de todas las contaminaciones, entonces, finalmente, lo-
grando la perfecciµn despu«s de much¯simos nacimientos dedicados
a la pr£ctica, llega a la meta suprema.
Bg 18.45
Every man can become perfect by following his qualities of work.
Please, now hear me explain how that can be done.
Bg 18.46 Through the worship of the Lord, who is the source of
all beings and who is omnipresent, man can achieve perfection
through the execution of his own work.

clearly what is best for me. Now I am Your disciple, and a soul
surrendered unto You. Please instruct me.
Bg 3.2
My intelligence is bewildered by Your equivocal instructions. There-
fore, please tell me decisively which will be most beneficial for me.
Bg 18.61
The Supreme Lord is situated in everyone's heart, O Arjuna, and is
directing the wanderings of all living entities, who are seated as on
a machine, made of the material energy.

Dealing with envy

Bg 5.22
An intelligent person does not take part in the sources of misery,
which are due to contact with the material senses. O son of Kunti,
such pleasures have a beginning and an end, and so the wise man
does not delight in them.

Bg 12.13-14
One who is not envious but who is a kind friend to all living entities,
who does not think himself a proprietor, who is free from false ego
and equal both in happiness and distress, who is always satisfied
and engaged in devotional service with determination and whose
mind and intelligence are in agreement with Me-he is very dear to
Me.
Bg 16.19
Those who are envious and mischievous, who are the lowest among
men, are cast by Me into the ocean of material existence, into
various demoniac species of life.
Bg 18.71
And one who listens with faith and without envy becomes free from
sinful reaction and attains to the planets where the pious dwell.

Confussion

Death

Bg 2.7
Now I am confused about my duty and have lost all composure
because of weakness. In this condition I am asking You to tell me

Bg 8.6
Whatever state of being one remembers when he quits his body,
that state he will attain without fail.

Conduct

146

By Theme

147

Bg 2.18
Only the material body of the indestructible, immeasurable and
eternal living entity is subject to destruction; therefore, fight, O
descendant of Bharata.

heavenly planets, or you triumph and enjoy the earthly kingdom.
So get up with determination, and fight.
Bg 2.7
Now I am confused about my duty and have lost all composure
because of weakness. In this condition I am asking You to tell me
clearly what is best for me. Now I am Your disciple, and a soul
surrendered unto You. Please instruct me.
Bg 18.73
Arjuna said: My dear Krishna, O You Infallible, now my illusion has
dissipated. By Your mercy I have recovered my memory. Now I am
firm and free from doubts, and I am willing to act in accordance
with Your instructions.
Bg 2.38
Fight to fight, regardless of happiness or sorrow, loss or gain, victory
or defeat, and by doing this you will never incur sin.
Bg 2.41
Those who are on this path are very determined, and their goal is
one. O beloved son of the Kurus, the intelligence of the irresolute
has innumerable ramifications.
Bg 12.13-14
One who is not envious but who is a kind friend to all living entities,
who does not think himself a proprietor, who is free from false ego
and equal both in happiness and distress, who is always satisfied
and engaged in devotional service with determination and whose
mind and intelligence are in agreement with Me-he is very dear to
Me.

Death of a loved one
Bg 2.13
As the embodied soul continually passes, in this body, from boy-
hood to youth to old age, the soul similarly passes into another
body at death. The self-realized soul is not bewildered by such a
change.
Bg 2.20
For the soul there is never birth nor death. Nor, having once
been, does he ever cease to be. He is unborn, eternal, ever-existing,
undying and primeval. He is not slain when the body is slain.
Bg 2.22
As a person puts on new garments, giving up old ones, similarly,
the soul accepts new material bodies, giving up the old and useless
ones.
Bg 2.25
It is said that the soul is invisible, inconceivable, immutable, and
un changeable. Knowing this, you should not grieve for the body.
Bg 2.27
For one who has taken his birth, death is certain; and for one who
is dead, birth is certain. Therefore, in the unavoidable discharge of
your duty, you should not lament.

Decisions
Bg 2.37
O son of Kunti, either you are killed on the battlefield and go to the

Demotivated
Bg 11.33
Therefore get up and prepare to fight. After conquering your
enemies you will enjoy a flourishing kingdom. They are already
put to death by My arrangement, and you, O Savyasacin, can be
but an instrument in the fight.

148

By Theme

Bg 18.48
Every endeavor is covered by some sort of fault, just as fire is
covered by smoke. Therefore one should not give up the work which
is born of his nature, O son of Kunti, even if such work is full of
fault.
Bg 18.78
Wherever there is Krishna, the master of all mystics, and wherever
there is Arjuna, the supreme archer, there will also certainly be
opulence, victory, extraordinary power, and morality. That is my
opinion.

Depression
Bg 2.3
O son of Prtha, do not yield to this degrading impotence. It does
not become you. Give up such petty weakness of heart and arise, O
chastiser of the enemy.
Bg 2.14
O son of Kunti, the nonpermanent appearance of happiness and dis-
tress, and their disappearance in due course, are like the appearance
and disappearance of winter and summer seasons. They arise from
sense perception, O scion of Bharata, and one must learn to tolerate
them without being disturbed.
Bg 5.21
Such a liberated person is not attracted to material sense pleasure
or external objects but is always in trance, enjoying the pleasure
within. In this way, the self-realized person enjoys unlimited hap-
piness, for he concentrates on the Supreme.

149

Determination
Bg 2.41
Those who are on this path are resolute in purpose, and their aim
is one. O beloved child of the Kurus, the intelligence of those who
are irresolute is many-branched.

Discovering meaning
Bg 16.5
The transcendental qualities lead to liberation, while demonic
qualities lead to captivity. Do not worry, O son of PaҰѶu, for you
are born with divine qualities.
Bg 15.20
This is the most confidential part of the Vedic scriptures, O immac-
ulate one, and now I have revealed it. Whoever understands this
will become wise, and their eॸorts will attain perfection.
Bg 14.20
When the embodied being can transcend the three modes associ-
ated with the material body, they can be liberated from birth, death,
old age, and their aॼictions, and can enjoy nectar even in this life.
Bg 5.19
Those whose minds are established in sameness and equanimity
have already conquered the conditions of birth and death. They
are flawless like Brahman, and thus they are already situated in
Brahman.
Bg 9.12
Those who are thus bewildered are attracted by atheistic and
demonic views. In that deluded condition, their hopes for liberation,
their fruitive activities, and their cultivation of knowledge are all
frustrated.

150

By Theme

Discriminated
Bg 5.18
The humble sage, by virtue of true knowledge, sees with equal
vision a learned and gentle brahma, a cow, an elephant, a dog and
a dog-eater outcaste.
Bg 5.19
Those whose minds are established in sameness and equanimity
have al ready conquered the conditions of birth and death. They
are flawless like Brahman, and thus they are already situated in
Brahman.
Bg 6.32
He is a perfect yogi who, by comparison to his own self, sees the
true equality of all beings, both in their happiness and distress, O
Arjuna!
Bg 9.29
I envy no one, nor am I partial to anyone. I am equal to all. But
whoever renders service unto Me in devotion is a friend, is in Me,
and I am also a friend to him.

Existential Crisis
Bg 6.6
For him who has conquered the mind, the mind is the best of
friends; but for one who has failed to do so, his very mind will
be the greatest enemy.
Bg 6.5
A man must elevate himself by his own mind, not degrade himself.
The mind is the friend of the conditioned soul, and his enemy as
well.
Bg 4.40
But ignorant and unfaithful individuals who doubt the revealed
Scriptures do not gain awareness of God; instead, they falter. For

151
the soul that doubts, there is no happiness in this world or the
hereafter.
Bg 4.36
Even if you are considered to be the most sinful of all sinners, when
you are situated in the boat of transcendental knowledge, you will
be able to cross over the ocean of miseries.
Bg 4.33
Oh, chastiser of the enemy! The sacrifice made with knowledge is
better than the sacrifice of material possessions. After all, oh son
of Pӄtha Arjuna , all sacrifices of labor ultimately culminate in
transcendental knowledge.

Expectations
Bg 16.16
Thus perplexed by various anxieties and bound by a web of illu-
sions, they become too attached to sense enjoyment and fall into
hell.
Bg 2.47
You have the right to perform your prescribed duty, but not to the
fruits of the action. Never consider yourself to be the cause of the
results of your activities, and never get attached to failing to do your
duty.
Bg 4.22
He is satisfied with gains that come by themselves, he has overcome
duality, he is free from all envy, and he is stable in both success and
failure. Therefore, he never gets entangled even though he executes
actions.
Bg 3.30
Therefore, fight, O Arjuna, surrendering to Me all your works, with
full knowledge of Me, without desire for gain, without sense of
possession and free from lethargy.
Bg 3.23
For, if I did not engage in work, O Partha, certainly all men would

152

By Theme

follow My path.

153

Feeling shameful
Family

Bg 2.13
As the embodied soul continually passes, in this body, from boy-
hood to youth to old age, the soul similarly passes into another
body at death. The self-realized soul is not bewildered by such a
change.
Bg 2.4
Arjuna said: O killer of Madhu Krishna, how can I counterattaࢤ with
arrows in battle men like Bhima and Drona, who are worthy of my
worship?

Fear
Bg 4.10
Being freed from attachment, fear and anger, being fully absorbed
in Me and taking refuge in Me, many, many persons in the past
became purified by knowledge of Me-and thus they all attained
transcendental love for Me.
Bg 11.50
Sanjaya said to Dhrtarastra: The Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Krishna, while speaking thus to Arjuna, displayed His real four-
armed form, and at last He showed him His two-armed form, thus
encouraging the fearful Arjuna.
Bg 18.30
O son of Prtha, that understanding by which one knows what ought
to be done and what ought not to be done, what is to be feared and
what is not to be feared, what is binding and what is liberating, that
understanding is established in the mode of goodness.

Bg 4.36
Even if you are considered to be the most sinful of all sinners, when
you are situated in the boat of transcendental knowledge, you will
be able to cross over the ocean of miseries.
Bg 4.37
As the blazing fire turns firewood to ashes, O Arjuna, so does the
fire of
knowledge bum to ashes all reactions to material activities.
Bg 5.10
One who performs his duty without attachment, surrendering the
results unto the Supreme God, is not aॸected by sinful action, as
the lotus leaf is untouched by water.
Bg 9.30
Even if one commits the most abominable actions, if he is engaged
in
devotional service, he is to be considered saintly because he is
properly situated.
Bg 10.3
He who knows Me as the unborn, as the beginningless, as the
Supreme Lord of all the worlds-he, undeluded among men, is freed
from all sins.
Bg 14.6
O sinless one, the mode of goodness, being purer than the others, is
illuminating, and it frees one from all sinful reactions. Those situ-
ated in that mode develop knowledge, hut they become conditioned
by the concept of happiness.
Bg 18.66
Abandon all varieties of religion and just surrender unto Me. I shall
deliver you from all sinful reaction. Do not fear.

154

By Theme

Forgetfulness
Bg 15.15
I am seated in everyone's heart, and from Me come remembrance,
knowledge and forgetfulness. By all the Vedas am I to be known;
indeed I am the compiler of Vedanta, and I am the knower of the
Vedas.
Bg 18.61
The Supreme Lord is situated in everyone's heart, O Arjuna, and is
directing the wanderings of all living entities, who are seated as on
a machine, made of the material energy.

Friends
Bg 1.37-38
O Janardana, although these men, overtaken by greed, see no fault
in killing one's family or quarreling with friends, why should we,
with know ledge of the sin, engage in these acts?
Bg 4.3
That very ancient science of the relationship with the Supreme is
today told by Me to you because you are My devotee as well as My
friend; therefore you can understand the transcendental mystery of
this science.
Bg 5.29
The sages, knowing Me as the uitimate purpose of all sacrifices and
austerities, the Supreme Lord of all planets and demigods and the
bene factor and well-wisher of all living entities, attain peace from
the pangs of material miseries.
Bg 6.9
A person is said to be still further advanced when he regards all-the
honest well-wisher, friends and enemies, the envious, the pious, the
sinner and those who are indiॸerent and impartial-with an equal
mind.

155
Bg 9.18
I am the goal, the sustainer, the master, the witness, the abode,
the refuge and the most dear friend. I am the creation and the
annihilation, the basis of everything, the resting place and the
eternal seed.

God
Bg 4.8
In order to deliver the pious and to annihilate the miscreants, as
well as to reestablish the principles of religion, I advent Myself
millennium after millennium.
Bg 4.9
One who knows the transcendental nature of My appearance and
activities does not, upon leaving the body, take his birth again in
this material world, but attains My eternal abode, O Arjuna.
Bg 10.8
I am the source of all spiritual and material worlds. Everything
emanates from Me. The wise who know this perfectly engage in
My devotional service and worship Me with all their hearts.
Bg 15.15
I am seated in everyone's heart, and from Me come remembrance,
knowledge and forgetfulness. By all the Vedas am I to be known;
indeed I am the compiler of Vedanta, and I am the knower of the
Vedas.
Bg 18.61
The Supreme Lord is situated in everyone's heart, O Arjuna, and is
directing the wanderings of all living entities, who are seated as on
a machine, made of the material energy.

156

By Theme

Greed
Bg 14.17
From the mode of goodness, real knowledge develops; from the
mode of passion, grief develops; and from the mode of ignorance,
foolishness, madness and illusion develop.
Bg 16.21
There are three gates leading to this hell-lust, anger, and greed. Ev-
ery sane man should give these up, for they lead to the degradation
of the soul.
Bg 17.25
One should perform sacrifice, penance and charity with the word
tat. The purpose of such transcendental activities is to get free from
the material entanglement.

157
souls, are under the protection of the divine nature. They are fully
dedicated to devotional service, knowing that I am the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, the origin and inexhaustible.
Bg 2.15: O Arjuna, the best among men, the person who is not
disturbed by happiness and distress and remains steady in both, is
certainly eligible for liberation.
Bg 5.13: When the embodied living being controls their nature and
mentally renounces all actions, they reside happily in the city of
nine gates, the material body, neither working nor causing work to
be done.
Bg 12.17: One who neither rejoices nor grieves, who neither laments
nor desires, and who renounces both auspicious and inauspicious
things, such a devotee is very dear to Me.

Ζdentity
Happiness
Bg 2.14
O son of Kunfi, the nonpermanent appearance of happiness and dis-
tress, and their disappearance in due course, are like the appearance
and disappearance of winter and summer seasons. They arise from
sense perception, O scion of Bharata, and one must learn to tolerate
them without being disturbed.
Bg 2.59: The embodied soul can be restrained from the enjoyment of
the senses, even though the taste for sense objects may still remain.
But, when one experiences a higher taste and thus renounces such
engagements, their consciousness becomes steady.
Bg 5.29: A person who is fully aware of Me, who knows Me as the
ultimate beneficiary of all sacrifices and austerities, as the Supreme
Lord of all planets and demigods, and as the well-wishing friend
of all living entities, is liberated from the torments of material
suॸerings and finds peace.
Bg 9.13: O son of Prtha, those who are not deluded, the great

Bg 3.27
The spirit soul, confused by the influence of the false ego, believes
itself to be the author of activities that are actually performed by
the three modes of the material nature.

Ζllusion
Bg 7.14
This divine energy of Mine, consisting of the three modes of mate-
rial nature, is diॻcult to overcome. But those who have surrendered
unto Me can easily cross beyond it.

158

By Theme

Knowledge
Bg 9.2
This knowledge is the king of education, the most secret of all
secrets. It is the purest knowledge, and because it gives direct
perception of the self by realization, it is the perfection of religion.
It is everlasting, and it is joyfully performed.

Laziness
Bg 3.8
Perform your prescribed duty, for action is better than inaction. A
man cannot even maintain his physical body without work.
Bg 3.20
Even kings like Janaka and others attained the perfectional stage
by performance of prescribed duties. Therefore, just for the sake of
educating the people in general, you should perform your work.
Bg 6.16
There is no possibility of one's becoming a yogi, O Arjuna, if one
eats too much, or eats too little, sleeps too much or does not sleep
enough.
Bg 18.39
And that happiness which is blind to self-realization, which is delu-
sion from beginning to end and which arises from sleep, laziness
and illusion is said to be of the nature of ignorance.

Leader
Bg 9.22
But to those who always adore Me with exclusive devotion, med-
itating on My transcendental form, I bring what they laࢤ and
preserve what they have.

159
Bg 18.61
The Supreme Lord is in everyone's heart, oh Arjuna! And He is
directing the movements of all living entities, who are sitting as if
they were in a machine made of material energy.
Bg 18.62
O Scion of Bharata, surrender yourself to Him totally. By his grace
you will achieve transcendental peace and reach the supreme and
eternal abode.
Bg 18.58
If you become conscious of Me, you will pass over all the obstacles
of conditional life by My grace. If, however, you do not work in
such consciousness but act through false ego, not hearing Me, you
will be lost.
Bg 17.15
The austerity of speech consists in uttering words that are true,
pleasant, beneficial and that do not agitate others, and also in
regularly reciting the Vedic literatures.

Life cycle
Bg 10.6
The seven great sages, and before them the other four great sages
and the Manus the progenitors of mankind , come from Me, born
of My mind, and all living beings that populate the various planets
are descended from them.
Bg 10.8
I am the source of all the material and spiritual worlds. Everything
emanates from Me. The wise who know this perfectly, devote
themselves to My devotional service and worship Me with all their
hearts.
Bg 10.34
I am the all-devouring death, and I am the generating principle of
all that is to exist. Among women, I am fame, fortune, fine speech,
memory, intelligence, constancy, and patience.

160

By Theme

Bg 10.39
Moreover, O Arjuna, I am the generative seed of all existences.
There is no being-mobile or immobile-that can exist without Me.
Bg 11.32
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said, I am time, the great
destroyer of the worlds, and I have come here to destroy all people.
Except for you PaҰdavas, all the soldiers here on both sides will be
killed.
Bg 7.6
All created beings have their origin in these two natures. From all
that is material and from all that is spiritual in this world, know
with all certainty that I am both the origin and the dissolution.

Loneliness
Bg 6.30
For one who sees Me everywhere and sees everything in Me, I am
never lost, nor is he ever lost to Me.
Bg 9.29
I envy no one, nor am I partial to anyone. I am equal to all. But
whoever renders service unto Me in devotion is a friend, is in Me,
and I am also a friend to him.
Bg 13.16
The Supreme Truth exists both internally and externally, in the
moving and nonmoving. He is beyond the power of the material
senses to see or to know. Although far, far away, He is also near to
all.
Bg 13.18
He is the source of light in all luminous objects. He is beyond the
darkness of matter and is unmanifested. He is knowledge, He is the
object of knowledge, and He is the goal of knowledge. He is situated
in everyone's heart.

161

Losing hope
Bg 4.11
All of them-as they surrender unto Me-l reward accordingly. Ev-
eryone follows My path in all respects, O son of Prtha.
Bg 9.22
But those who worship Me with devotion, meditating on My
transcendental form-to them I carry what they laࢤ and preserve
what they have.
Bg 9.34
Engage your mind always in thinking of Me, oॸer obeisances and
worship Me. Being completely absorbed in Me, surely you will
come to Me.
Bg 18.66
Abandon all varieties of religion and just surrender unto Me. I shall
deliver you from all sinful reaction. Do not fear.
Bg 18.78
Wherever there is Krishna, the master of all mystics, and wherever
there is Arjuna, the supreme archer, there will also certainly be
opulence, victory, extraordinary power, and morality. That is my
opinion.

Love
Bg 3.33
Even a man of knowledge acts according to his own nature, for
every one follows his nature. What can repression accomplish?
Bg 4.41
Therefore, one who has renounced the fruits of his action, whose
doubts are destroyed by transcendental knowledge, and who is
situated firmly in the self is not bound by works, O conqueror of
riches.
Bg 1.41

162

By Theme

When there is increase of unwanted population, a hellish situation
is created both for the family and for those who destroy the family
tradition. In such corrupt families, there is no oॸering of oblations
of food and water to the ancestors.
Bg 3.11
The demigods, being pleased by sacrifices, will also please you; thus
nourishing one another, there will reign general prosperity for all.

Lust
Bg 3.37
The Blessed Lord said: It is lust only, Arjuna, which is born of
contact with the material modes of passion and later transformed
into wrath, and which is the all-devouring, sinful enemy of this
world.
Bg 3.41
Therefore, O Arjuna, best of the Bharatas, in the very beginning
curb this great symbol of sin lust by regulating the senses, and
slay this destroyer of knowledge and self-realization.
Bg 3.43
Thus knowing oneself to be transcendental to material senses, mind
and intelligence, one should control the lower self by the higher
self and thus by spiritual strength-٦conquer this insatiable enemy
known as lust.
Bg 5.22
An intelligent person does not take part in the sources of misery,
which are due to contact with the material senses. O son of Kunti,
such pleasures have a beginning and an end, and so the wise man
does not delight in them.
Bg 16.21
There are three gates leading to this hell-lust, anger, and greed. Ev-
ery sane man should give these up, for they lead to the degradation
of the soul.

163

The Master
Bg 4.34
Just try to learn the truth by approaching a spiritual master. Inquire
from him submissively and render service unto him. The self-
realized soul can impart knowledge unto you because he has seen
the truth.
Bg 5.18
The humble sage, by virtue of true knowledge, sees with equal
vision a learned and gentle brahma, a cow, an elephant, a dog and
a dog-eater outcaste .
Bg 9.14
Always chanting My glories, endeavoring with great determination,
bowing down before Me, these great souls perpetually worship Me
with devotion.
Bg 4.2
This supreme science was thus received through the chain of
disciplic succession, and thus understood by the holy kings. But in
the course of time the succession broke down, and therefore science
as it is seems to be lost.
Material World
Bg 7.4
Earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind, intelligence and false ego-
altogether these eight comprise My separated material energies.
Bg 7.5
Besides this inferior nature, O mighty-armed Arjuna, there is a
superior energy of Mine, which are all living entities who are
struggling with material nature and are sustaining the universe.

Material World
Bg 7 .4
Earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind, intelligence and false ego, these

164

By Theme

eight elements together constitute My separate material energies.
Bg 7 .5
In addition to all this, O Arjuna, he of the mighty arms, there is an
energy of Mine that is superior, which consists of the living entities
that are exploiting the resources of that lower material nature.

Nature
Bg 3.27
The spirit soul that is confused by the influence of the false ego be-
lieves itself to be the author of activities that are actually performed
by the three modes of material nature.
Bg 9.10
This material nature, which is one of My energies, functions un-
der My direction, O son of Kunti, and produces all moving and
unmoving beings. By its command, this manifestation is created
and annihilated again and again.
Bg 7.4
Earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind, intelligence, and false ego, these
eight elements together constitute My separate material energies.
Bg 3.29
Confused by the modes of material nature, the ignorant devote
themselves entirely to material activities and become attached to
them. But the wise should not disturb them, although these duties
are inferior because of the laࢤ of knowledge that the executors
suॸer from.
Bg 13.20
It should be known that material nature and living entities have
no beginning. Their transformations and the modes of matter are
products of material nature.

165

Practice
Bg 12.8
Just fix your mind on Me, the Supreme Personality of God, and
engage all your intelligence in Me. Thus, you will always live with
Me without any doubt.
Bg 12.9
My dear Arjuna, O conqueror of wealth, if you cannot fix your
mind on Me without deviation, then follow the regulative principles
of bhakti-yoga. In this way, cultivate the desire to reach Me.
Bg 12.10
If you cannot practice the regulations of bhakti-yoga, then simply
try to work for Me, for by working in this way, you will come to
the perfect stage.
Bg 12.11
However, if you are unable to work with that consciousness of Me,
then try to act by renouncing all results of your work and try to
situate yourself in the self.
Bg 6.35
The Blessed Lord said: O mighty-armed son of Kunti, it is undoubt-
edly very diॻcult to curb the restless mind, but it is possible by
constant practice and by detachment.

Practicing Forgiveness
Bg 11.44
You are the Supreme Lord, to he worshiped by every living being.
Thus I fall down to oॸer You my respects and ask Your mercy.
Please tolerate the wrongs that I may have done to You and hear
with me as a father with his son, or a friend with his friend, or a
lover with his beloved.
Bg 12.13 -14
One who is not envious but who is a kind friend to all living entities,

166

By Theme

167

who does not think himself a proprietor, who is free from false ego
and equal both in happiness and distress, who is always satisfied
and engaged in devotional service with determination and whose
mind and intelligence are in agreement with Me-he is very dear to
Me.
Bg 16.1-3
The Blessed Lord said: Fearlessness, purification of one's existence,
cultivation of spiritual knowledge, charity, self-control, perfor-
mance of sacrifice, study of the Vedas, austerity and simplicity;
nonviolence, truthfulness, freedom from anger; renunciation, tran-
quility, aversion to fault finding, compassion and freedom from
covetousns; gentleness, modesty and steady determination; vigor,
forgiveness, fortitude, cleanliness, free dom from envy and the
passion for honor-these transcendental qualities, O son of Bharata,
belong to godly men endowed with divine nature.

Bg 18.26
The worker who is free from all material attachments and false ego,
who is enthusiastic and resolute and who is indiॸerent to success
or failure, is a worker in the mode of goodness.
Bg 18.58
If you become conscious of Me, you will pass over all the obstacles
of conditional life by My grace. If, however, you do not work in
such consciousness but act through false ego, not hearing Me, you
will be lost.

Pride
Bg 16.4
Arrogance, pride, anger, conceit, harshness and ignorance-these
qualities belong to those of demonic nature, O son of Prtha.
Bg 16.13
The demoniac person thinks: "So much wealth do I have today, and
I will gain more according to my schemes. So much is mine now,
and it will increase in the future, more and more.
Bg 16.14
He is my enemy, and I have killed him; and my other enemy will
also be killed. I am the lord of everything, I am the enjoyer, I am
perfect, powerful and happy.
Bg 16.15
I am the richest man, surrounded by aristocratic relatives. There is
none so powerful and happy as I am. I shall perform sacrifices, I
shall give some charity, and thus I shall rejoice." In this way, such
persons are deluded by ignorance.

Professionals
Bg 1.10
Our might is immeasurable and we are perfectly protected by
Grandfather Bhiӌma, whereas the strength of the PaҰѶava, care-
fully protected by Bhima, is limited.
Bg 2.31
Considering your specific duty as a kӌatriya, you should know that
there is no better occupation for you than to fight based on religious
principles; so, you have no reason to hesitate.
Bg 2.32
Blessed are the kӌatriyas, O Partha, who are presented with such
opportunities for battle without seeking them, opening the doors
to celestial planets.
Bg 2.46
Just as a small well can fulfill all the purposes served by a large
reservoir of water immediately, similarly, one who understands the
purpose behind the Vedas can fulfill all the purposes of the Vedas.
Bg 13.24
One who comprehends this philosophy concerning material nature,
the living entity, and the interaction of the modes of nature, is as-
sured of liberation. Such a person will not be born again, regardless
of their current position.

168

By Theme

169

Reincarnation

Repression

Bg 2.13
As the embodied soul continually passes, in this body, from boy-
hood to youth to old age, the soul similarly passes into another
body at death. The self-realized soul is not bewildered by such a
change.

Bg 3.33
Even a man of knowledge acts according to his own nature, for
everyone follows his nature. What can repression accomplish?

Respect
Relation with God
Bg 4.11
All of them-as they surrender unto Me-l reward accordingly. Ev-
eryone follows My path in all respects, O son of Prtha.
Bg 10.10
To those who are constantly, devoted and worship Me with love, I
give the understanding by which they can come to Me.
Bg 10.11
Out of compassion for them, I, dwelling in their hearts, destroy with
the shining lamp of knowledge the darkness born of ignorance.
Bg 15.7
The living entities in this conditioned world are My eternal, frag-
mental parts. Due to conditioned life, they are struggling very hard
with the six senses, which include the mind.
Bg 18.55
One can understand the Supreme Personality as He is only by
devotion al service. And when one is in full consciousness of the
Supreme Lord by such devotion, he can enter into the kingdom of
God.
Bg 18.65
Always think of Me and become My devotee. Worship Me and oॸer
your homage unto Me. Thus you will come to Me without fail. I
promise you this because you are My very dear friend.

Bg 3.16
My dear Arjuna, one who in human life does not follow the
established cycle of sacrifices as prescribed by the Vedas certainly
leads a life filled with sin. Such a person lives in vain, for they only
live for the gratification of the senses."
Bg 3.33
Even a man of knowledge acts according to his own nature, for
every one follows his nature. What can repression accomplish?
Bg 16.9
Following these conclusions, demonic people, who are lost and
laࢤ intelligence, engage in harmful and dreadful deeds aimed at
destroying the world.
Bg 16.10
Taking refuge in insatiable lust and absorbed in the vanity of pride
and false prestige, demonic people, deceived in this way, are always
devoted to dirty deeds, drawn by the temporal.
Bg 16.13-15
The demoniac person thinks: "So much wealth do I have today, and
I will gain more according to my schemes. So much is mine now,
and it will increase in the future, more and more. He is my enemy,
and I have killed him; and my other enemy will also be killed.
I am the lord of everything, I am the enjoyer, I am perfect, powerful
and happy. I am the richest man, surrounded by aristocratic rela-
tives. There is none so powerful and happy as I am. I shall perform

170

By Theme

171

sacrifices, I shall give some charity, and thus I shall rejoice." In this
way, such persons are deluded by ignorance.

who subdues his senses quiࢤly attains the supreme spiritual peace.
Bg 5.29
The sages, knowing Me as the ultimate purpose of all sacrifices and
austerities, the Supreme Lord of all planets and demigods and the
bene factor and well-wisher of all living entities, attain peace from
the pangs of material miseries.
Bg 8.28
A person who accepts the path of devotional service is not bereft
of the results derived from studying the Vedas, performing austere
sacrifices, giving charity or pursuing philosophical and fruitive
activities. At the end he reaches the supreme abode.

Responsability
Bg 2.47
You have a right to perform your prescribed duties, but you are
not entitled to the fruits of your actions. Never consider yourself
to be the cause of the results of your activities, nor be attached to
inaction.
Bg 3.16
Arjuna, one who does not follow the wheel of creation set into
motion in this world, sinful and sensual; he lives in pain, seeking
to enjoy the fruits of his work.
Bg 2.31
Considering your specific duty as a kӌatriya, you should know that
there is no better occupation for you than to fight based on religious
principles; so, you have no reason to hesitate.

Seeking peace
Bg 2.66
One who is not in transcendental consciousness can have neither a
controlled mind nor steady intelligence, without which there is no
possibility of peace. And how can there be any happiness without
peace?
Bg 2.71
A person who has given up all desires for sense gratification, who
lives free from desires, who has given up all sense of proprietorship
and is devoid of false ego-he alone can attain real peace.
Bg 4.39
A faithful man who is absorbed in transcendental knowledge and

Self Esteem
Bg 2.34
People will always speak of your infamy, and for one who has been
honored, dishonor is worse than death.
Bg 4.36
Even if you are considered to be the most sinful of all sinners, when
you are situated in the boat of transcendental knowledge, you will
be able to cross over the ocean of miseries.
Bg 6.5
A man must elevate himself by his own mind, not degrade himself.
The mind is the friend of the conditioned soul, and his enemy as
well.
Bg 6.17
He who is regulated in his eating, sleeping, recreation, and work
habits can mitigate all material suॸerings through the practice of
the yoga system.
Bg 2.23
The soul can never be cut into pieces by any weapon, nor can fire
burn it, water wet it, or the wind wither it.

172

By Theme

Sons
Bg 6.32
He is a perfect yogi who, by comparison to his own self, sees the
true equality of all beings, both in their happiness and distress, O
Arjuna!
Bg 9.5
And yet everything that is created does not rest in Me. Behold My
mystic opulence! Although I am the maintainer of all living entities,
and although I am everywhere, still My Self is the very source of
creation.
Bg 9.17
I am the father of this universe, the mother, the support, and the
grand sire. I am the object of knowledge, the purifier and the
syllable om. I am also the tk, the Sarna, and the Yajur Vedas .
Bg 11.43
You are the father of this complete cosmic manifestation, the
worship able chief, the spiritual master. No one is equal to You,
nor can anyone be one with You. Within the three worlds, You are
immeasurable.
Bg 13.9
The perception of the evil of birth, death, old age and disease; nonat-
tachment to children, wife, home and the rest, and evenmindedness
amid pleasant and unpleasant events.

Sorrow and Regret
Bg 2.11
The Supreme Personality of God said: While you speak with cul-
tured words, you lament over what is not worthy of lament. Those
who are wise do not lament for the living or the dead.
Bg 4.8
In order to deliver the pious and to annihilate the miscreants, as

173
well as to reestablish the principles of religion, I advent Myself
millennium after millennium.
Bg 5.23
If before leaving this current body, one is capable of tolerating the
impulses of material senses and restraining the force of desire and
anger, one finds oneself well situated and happy in this world.
Bg 5.15
And the Supreme Lord also does not assume responsibility for
anyone's sinful or pious activities. However, embodied beings are
confused due to the ignorance that covers their true knowledge.
Bg 2.27
For one who has taken his birth, death is certain; and for one who
is dead, birth is certain. Therefore, in the unavoidable discharge of
your duty, you should not lament.
Bg 12.17
He who neither rejoices nor sorrows, who neither laments nor
desires, and who renounces both favorable and unfavorable things,
a devotee of that kind is very dear to Me.
Bg 18.54
One who is thus transcendentally situated at once realizes the
Supreme Brahman. He never laments nor desires to have anything;
he is equally disposed to every living entity. In that state he attains
pure devotional service unto Me.
Bg 5.20
A person who neither rejoices upon achieving something pleasant
nor laments upon receiving something unpleasant, who is wise in
relation to being, not confused, and who understands the science
of God, is already situated in transcendence.
Bg 2.14
Oh son of Kunti! The temporary appearance of happiness and dis-
tress, and their disappearance in due course, is like the coming and
going of the seasons of winter and summer. All of this originates
from the perception of the senses, O descendant of Bharata, and
one should learn to tolerate it without being disturbed.
Bg 2.59

174

By Theme

175

To the incarnated soul, one can distance it from the enjoyment
of the senses, even though the liking for sensory objects may
still remain within it. However, upon experiencing a higher taste
and consequently abandoning such occupations, its consciousness
becomes fixed.
Bg 5.29
The sages, knowing Me as the ultimate purpose of all sacrifices and
austerities, the Supreme Lord of all planets and demigods and the
bene factor and well-wisher of all living entities, attain peace from
the pangs of material miseries.
Bg 9.13
Oh, son of Prtha Arjuna ! Those who are not deluded, the great
souls, are under the protection of the divine nature. They are fully
dedicated to devotional service because they know that I am the
Supreme Personality of God, original and inexhaustible.
Bg 2.15
Oh, you, the best among men, Arjuna, the person who is not
disturbed by happiness and distress and remains steady in the midst
of both is undoubtedly worthy of liberation.
Bg 5.13.
When the embodied living being controls their nature and mentally
renounces all actions, they reside happily in the city with nine gates,
the material body, without engaging in or causing others to engage
in work.
Bg 12.17
One who neither rejoices nor grieves, who neither laments nor
desires, and who renounces both favorable and unfavorable things,
such a devotee of that kind is very dear to Me."

man is not deluded at that.
Bg 2.17
That which pervades the entire body, know it to be indestructible.
No one can cause the destruction of the imperishable soul.
Bg 2.19
He who thinks that the soul kills, and he who thinks of it as killed,
are both ignorant. The soul kills not, nor is it killed.
Bg 2.20
The soul is never born and never dies, nor does it become only after
being born. For it is unborn, eternal, everlasting, and ancient; even
though the body is slain, the soul is not.
Bg 2.22
Just as a person puts on new garments after discarding the old ones,
similarly, the soul accepts new material bodies, giving up the old
and useless ones.
Bg 2.23
The soul can never be cut to pieces by any weapon, nor burned by
fire, nor moistened by water, nor withered by the wind.

Soul
Bg 2.13
Just as the boyhood, youth and old age come to the embodied Soul
in this body, in the same manner, it attains another body; the wise

Spirituality
Bg 4.7
Whenever and wherever there is a decline in religious practice, O
descendant of Bharata, and a predominant rise of irreligion-at that
time I descend Myself.
Bg 6.47
And of all yogis, he who always abides in Me with great faith,
worshiping Me in transcendental loving service, is most intimately
united with Me in yoga and is the highest of all.
Bg 7.19
After many births and deaths, he who is actually in knowledge
surren ders unto Me, knowing Me to be the cause of all causes and
all that is. Such a great soul is very rare.
Bg 9.26

176

By Theme

177

If one oॸers Me with love and devotion a leaf, a flower, fruit or
water, I will accept it.
Bg 9.27
O son of Kunti, all that you do, all that you eat, all that you oॸer and
give away, as well as all austerities that you may perform, should
be done as an oॸering unto Me.
Bg 9.34 18.65
Engage your mind always in thinking of Me, oॸer obeisances and
worship Me. Being completely absorbed in Me, surely you will
come to Me.
Bg 10.9
The thoughts of My pure devotees dwell in Me, their lives are
surrendered to Me, and they derive great satisfaction and bliss
enlightening one another and conversing about Me.
Bg 11.55
My dear Arjuna, one who is engaged in My pure devotional service,
free from the contaminations of previous activities and from mental
specula tion, who is friendly to every living entity, certainly comes
to Me.
Bg 18.54
One who is thus transcendentally situated at once realizes the
Supreme Brahman. He never laments nor desires to have anything;
he is equally disposed to every living entity. In that state he attains
pure devotional service unto Me.
Bg 18.66
Abandon all varieties of religion and just surrender unto Me. I shall
deliver you from all sinful reaction. Do not fear.

truth.
Bg 5.18
The humble sages, by virtue of true knowledge, see with the same
vision a meek and learned brahmana, a cow, an elephant, a dog and
a dog-eater an outcast .
Bg 9.14
Always singing My glories, striving with great determination and
prostrating themselves before Me, these great souls perpetually
adore Me with devotion.
Bg 4.2
This supreme science was thus received through the chain of
disciplic succession, and the holy kings understood it in that way.
But in the course of time the succession was broken, and, therefore,
the science as it is seems to be lost.

Teacher
Bg 4.34
Just try to learn the truth by going to a spiritual teacher. Ask him
questions in a submissive way and be of service to him. The self-
realized soul can impart knowledge to you, because he has seen the

Teams
Bg 3.26
Let not the wise disrupt the minds of the ignorant who are attached
to fruitive action. They should not be encouraged to refrain from
work, but to engage in work in the spirit of devotion.
Bg 3.21
Whatever action is performed by a great man, common men follow
in his footsteps. And whatever standards he sets by exemplary acts,
all the world pursues.
Bg 2.7
Now I am confused about my duty and have lost all composure
because of weakness. In this condition I am asking You to tell me
clearly what is best for me. Now I am Your disciple, and a soul
surrendered unto You. Please instruct me.
Bg 18.73
Arjuna said: My dear Krishna, O You Infallible, now my illusion has
dissipated. By Your mercy I have recovered my memory. Now I am
firm and free from doubts, and I am willing to act in accordance

178

By Theme

with Your instructions.
Bg 2.50
A man engaged in devotional service rids himself of both good and
bad actions even in this life. Therefore strive for yoga, O Arjuna,
which is the art of all work.
Bg 2.41
Those who are on this path are very determined, and their goal is
one. O beloved son of the Kurus, the intelligence of the irresolute
has innumerable ramifications.

Temptation
Bg 2.60
The senses are so strong and impetuous, Oh Arjuna, that they
forcibly carry away the mind even of a man of discrimination who
is endeavoring
to control them.
Bg 2.61
One who restrains his senses and fixes his consciousness upon Me
is known as a man of steady intelligence.
Bg 2.70
A person who is not disturbed by the incessant flow of desires-that
enter like rivers into the ocean which is ever being filled but is
always stillcan alone achieve peace, and not the man who strives
to satisfy such desires.
Bg 7.14
This divine energy of Mine, consisting of the three modes of mate-
rial nature, is diॻcult to overcome. But those who have surrendered
unto Me can easily cross beyond it.

179

Uncontrolled mind
Bg 6.5
A man must elevate himself by his own mind, not degrade himself.
The mind is the friend of the conditioned soul, and his enemy as
well.
Bg 6.6
For him who has conquered the mind, the mind is the best of
friends; but for one who has failed to do so, his very mind will
be the greatest enemy.
Bg 6.26
From whatever and wherever the mind wanders due to its fliࢤering
and unsteady nature, one must certainly withdraw it and bring it
baࢤ under the control of the Self.
Bg 6.35
The Blessed Lord said: O mighty-armed son of Kunti, it is undoubt-
edly very diॻcult to curb the restless mind, but it is possible by
constant practice and by detachment.

Vital Cycle
Bg 10.6
The seven great sages and before them the four other great sages
and the Manus progenitors of mankind are born out of My mind,
and all creatures in these planets descend from them.
Bg 10.8
I am the source of all spiritual and material worlds. Everything
emanates from Me. The wise who know this perfectly engage in
My devotional service and worship Me with all their hearts.
Bg 10.34
I am all-devouring death, and I am the generator of all things
yet to he. Among women I am fame, fortune, speech, memory,
intelligence, faith fulness and patience.

180

By Theme

181

Bg 10.39
Furthermore, O Arjuna, I am the generating seed of all existences.
There is no being-moving or unmoving-that can exist without Me.
Bg 11.32
The Blessed Lord said: Time I am, destroyer of the worlds, and
I have come to engage all people. With the exception of you the
Pandavas , all the soldiers here on both sides will be slain.
Bg 7.6
Of all that is material and all that is spiritual in this world, know
for certain that I am both its origin and dissolution.

clearly what is best for me. I am now Your disciple and a soul
devoted to You. Please instruct me.
Bg 18.73
Arjuna said, "My dear Krishna, O Thou Infallible One, now my
illusion is dispelled. By Your mercy, I have recovered my memory.
I am now firm and free from doubt, and I am willing to act in
accordance with Thy instructions.
Bg 2.50
Even in this life, the man who is engaged in devotional service is
free from both good and bad reactions. Therefore, strive for yoga,
which is the art of all work.
Bg 2.41
Those who are on this path are very resolute, and their goal is one.
O beloved son of the Kurus, the intelligence of the irresolute has
innumerable ramifications.

Work
Bg 3.9
Work done as a sacrifice for Vishnu has to be performed; otherwise,
work binds one to this material world. Therefore, O son of Kunti,
perform your prescribed duties for His satisfaction, and in that way,
you will always remain unattached and free from bondage.
Bg 3.23
For if I were to fail to carefully perform the prescribed duties, O
Partha, no doubt all men would follow my path.
Bg 3.26
So, in order not to disturb the minds of ignorant men who are
attached to the fruitive results of prescribed duties, the sage should
not induce them to stop working. Rather, working in the spirit of
devotion, he should engage them in all kinds of activities for the
gradual development of their Krishna consciousness.
Bg 3.21
Ordinary men follow in the footsteps of a great man, whatever
action he performs. And whatever standards he sets by exemplary
acts, the whole world follows them.
Bg 2.7
I am now confused as to my duty, and I have lost all composure
through petty weakness. In this condition, I ask You to tell me

By Verse
Chapter 2
Bg. 2.3 — Depression
Bg. 2.7 — Confusion
Bg. 2.13 — Death of a loved one
Bg. 2.14 — Depression
Bg. 2.20 — Death of a loved one
Bg. 2.22 — Death of a loved one
Bg. 2.25 — Death of a loved one
Bg. 2.27 — Death of a loved one
Bg. 2.56 — Anger
Bg. 2.60 — Temptation
Bg. 2.61 — Temptation
Bg. 2.62 — Anger
Bg. 2.63 — Anger
Bg. 2.66 — Seeking peace
Bg. 2.70 — Temptation
Bg. 2.71 — Seeking peace

Chapter 3
Bg. 3.2 — Confusion
Bg. 3.8 — Laziness

184

By Verse

185

Bg. 3.20 — Laziness

Bg. 6.26. — Uncontrolled mind

Bg. 3.37— Lust

Bg. 6.30 — Loneliness

Bg. 3.41 — Lust

Bg. 6.32 — Discriminated

Bg. 3.43 — Lust

Bg. 6.35. — Uncontrolled mind

Chapter 7

Chapter 4
Bg. 7.14 — Temptation

Bg. 4.10 — Fear
Bg. 4.11 — Losing hope

Chapter 8

Bg. 4.36 — Feeling sinful
Bg. 4.37 — Feeling sinful

Bg. 8.28 — Seeking peace

Bg. 4.39 — Seeking peace

Chapter 9
Chapter 5

Bg. 9.22 — Losing hope

Bg. 5.10 — Feeling sinful

Bg. 9.29 — Discriminated

Bg. 5.18 — Discriminated

Bg. 9.30 — Feeling sinful

Bg. 5.19 — Discriminated

Bg. 9.34 — Losing hope

Loneliness

Bg. 5.21 — Depression

Chapter 10

Bg. 5.22 — Lust
Bg. 5.29 — Seeking peace

Bg. 10.3 — Feeling sinful

Chapter 6
Bg. 6.5. — Uncontrolled mind
Bg. 6.6. — Uncontrolled mind
Bg. 6.16 — Laziness

Chapter 11
Bg. 11.33 — Demotivated
Bg. 11.44 — Practicing Forgiveness
Bg. 11.50 — Fear

186

By Verse

Chapter 12
Bg. 12.13 — Practicing Forgiveness

Dealing with envy

Bg. 12.14 — Practicing Forgiveness

Dealing with envy

Chapter 13

187
Bg. 16.19 — Dealing with envy
Bg. 16.21 — Greed

Lust

Chapter 17
Bg. 17.25 — Greed

Bg. 13.16 — Loneliness

Chapter 18

Bg. 13.18 — Loneliness
Bg. 18.26 — Pride

Chapter 14

Bg. 18.30 — Fear
Bg. 18.39 — Laziness

Bg. 14.6 — Feeling sinful

Bg. 18.48 — Demotivated

Bg. 14.17 — Greed

Bg. 18.58 — Pride

Chapter 15

Bg. 18.61 — Confusion

Forgetfulness

Bg. 18.66 — Feeling sinful
Bg. 15.15 — Forgetfulness

Chapter 16
Bg. 16.1 — Practicing Forgiveness
Bg. 16.2 — Practicing Forgiveness
Bg. 16.3 — Practicing Forgiveness
Bg. 16.4 — Pride
Bg. 16.13 — Pride
Bg. 16.14 — Pride
Bg. 16.15 — Pride

Losing hope

Bg. 18.71 — Dealing with envy
Bg. 18.78 — Demotivated
Bg. 18.78 — Losing hope

Glossary
A
Âcarya ١ Spiritual master who teaches by personal example.
Acintya ١ Inconceivable.
Acintya-bhedabheda-tattva ١ The doctrine of "simultaneously one
and diॸerent" of Lord Caitanya, which establishes that there is
inconceivably unity and diॸerence between the Absolute Truth and
His energy; that is, our existence may have the same qualities as the
Supreme Lord but in minute quantity, while He possesses them in
unlimited quantity.
Acyuta ١ Lit., one who never falls infallible, an attribute and name
of Krishna.
Adhibhĭtam ١ Physical nature.
Adhidaivatam ١ The universal form of the Supreme Lord.
Adhiyaj³a ١ The Supersoul, the plenary expansion of the Lord in
the heart of every living being.
Adhyatma-cetasa ١ One who depends solely on Krishna.
Aditi ١ The mother of the demigods.
Âdityas ١ The demigod sons of Aditi.
Advaita ١ Non-dual when referring to the Lord, it indicates that
there is no diॸerence between His body and Himself .
Advaitacarya ١ One of the four principal associates of Lord Cai-
tanya Mahaprabhu.
Agni ١ The demigod who controls fire.
Agnihotra-yaj³a ١ Fire sacrifice.

190

Glossary

AhiҪsa ١ Nonviolence.
Ajam ١ Unborn.
Akarma ١ Naiӌkarma action for which there is no reaction because
it is performed in Krishna consciousness.
Ânanda ١ Transcendental bliss.
Ananta ١ The name of the serpent with unlimited heads upon which
Lord ViӌҰu rests.
Anantavijaya ١ The name of the conchshell of King YudhiӌӖhira.
AҰu-atma ١ The tiny spiritual soul, part and parcel of Krishna.
Âpana-vayu ١ One of the internal bodily airs controlled by aӌӖaҮga-
yoga.
The apana-vayu flows downward.
Apara prakӄti ١ The lower material nature of the Lord.
Apauruӌeya ١ Not made by man i.e., revealed by God .
Arcana ١ The process of Deity worship, or engaging all the senses
in the service of the Lord.
Arca-vigraha ١ The Deity or incarnation of the Supreme Lord in
a form apparently made of matter, to facilitate the worship of
neophyte devotees.
Ârio ١ One who knows the value of life and has a civilization based
on spiritual enlightenment.

191
eight parts: yama, niyama, asana, pranayama, pratyahara, dharana,
dhyana, and samadhi.
Asura ١ A ١ not and sura ١ pious demon, one who does not follow
the principles of the scriptures.
Âsuram-bhavam-aĝrita ١ People who are openly atheistic.
Âtma ١ The self sometimes referring to the body, sometimes to the
soul, and sometimes to the senses .
Avatara ١ Lit., one who descends an incarnation of the Lord who
descends from the spiritual sky to the material universe with a
specific mission, as described in the scriptures.
Avidya ١ A ١ not and vidya ١ knowledge nescience, ignorance.
Avyakta ١ Unmanifested.
B
Bhagavan ١ Bhaga ١ opulence and van ١ possessing the possessor
of all opulences, generally considered as six ١ wealth, power, fame,
beauty, knowledge, and renunciation; an epithet of the Supreme
Person.
Bhakta ١ A devotee of the Supreme Lord, one who practices
devotion bhakti .
Bhakti ١ Love for God; purified service to the Lord's senses with
our own senses.

AsaҮga ١ Detachment from material consciousness.

Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Gosvami Maharaja Prabhupada ١ The
spiritual master of His Divine Grace A. C.

Asat ١ Temporary.

Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada.

Âĝrama ١ Refers to the four spiritual orders of life: brahmacari-
aĝrama, or student life; gӄhasta-aĝram, or married life; vanaprastha-
aĝrama, or retired life; and sannyasa-aĝrama, or renounced life.

Bhaktivinoda Thakur ١ The grand-spiritual master of His Divine
Grace A. C.

AӌӖaҮga-yoga ١ AӌӖa ١ eight and aҮga ١ part a mystical yoga
system proposed by Pata³jali in his Yoga-sĭtras, consisting of

Bhakti-yoga ١ The cultivation system of bhakti, or pure devotional
service, which is untainted by sense gratification or philosophical
speculation.

192

Glossary

193

Bhava ١ The preliminary stage of transcendental love for God.
Bhima ١ One of the five PanѶava brothers.
Bhiӌma ١ A great devotee and elder member of the Kuru dynasty.
Brahma ١ The first created living being.
Brahma-bhĭta ١ Condition of being liberated from material con-
tamination.
One in this state experiences transcendental happiness and engages
in the service of the Supreme Lord.

C
Caitanya-caritamӄta ١ The authorized scripture by Krishnadasa Kavi-
raja describing the teachings and pastimes of Lord Caitanya.
Caitanya Mahaprabhu ١ Krishna Himself, who appeared in the 15th
century in Navadvipa, Bengal.
He inaugurated the congregational chanting of the mahamantra,
Hare Krishna, and His life was the perfect example of practicing the
teachings of the Bhagavad-gita.

Brahmacari ١ Celibate student under the care of a bona fide
spiritual master.

CaҰѶalas ١ Dog-eaters, the lowest class of human beings.

Brahmacarya ١ The vow of strict sexual abstinence.

Candraloka ١ The moon.

Brahma-jij³asa ١ Spiritual inquiry into our own identity.

Caturmasya ١ A vow of austerity observed for four months each
year.

Brahmajyoti ١ Brahma ١ spiritual and jyoti ١ light the impersonal
eॸulgence emanating from the body of Krishna.
Brahmaloka ١ The abode of Lord Brahma.
Brahman ١ 1 The infinitesimal spiritual soul; 2 the all-pervading
impersonal aspect of Krishna; 3 the Supreme Personality of God-
head; 4 the total material substance.
BrahmaҰa ١ The intelligent class of men according to the social and
spiritual orders.
Brahma-saҪhita ١ An ancient Sanskrit scripture containing
Brahma's prayers to Govinda, revealed by Lord Caitanya in a
temple in South India.
Brahma-sĭtra ١ See Vedanta-sĭtra.
Buddhi-yoga ١ Buddhi ١ intelligence and yoga ١ mystic elevation
the practice of devotional service.
Action in Krishna consciousness is buddhi-yoga, as it is the highest
intelligence.

Candra ١ The demigod who rules the moon.

Citi-ĝakti ١ Citi ١ knowledge and ĝakti ١ power the internal or
illuminating potency of the Lord.
D
Daĝendriya ١ The ten senses: ears, eyes, tongue, nose, skin, hands,
legs, speech, anus, and genitals.
Deva ١ A demigod or divine person.
Devaki ١ The mother of Lord Krishna. When Krishna appears in the
material world, He first sends some of His pure devotees to act as
His father, mother, etc.
Devaki-nandana ١ Devaki -the mother of Krishna and nandana ١
pleasure Krishna, the pleasure of Devaki.
Dharma ١ The ability to render service, which is the essential
quality of a living being.
Dharmakӌetra ١ A sacred pilgrimage site.

194

Glossary

195

Dhira ١ One whom material energy cannot disturb.

GaruѶa ١ The giant eagle who acts as the carrier of Lord ViӌҰu.

Dӄӌtadyumna ١ The son of Drupada, who arranged the military
phalanxes of the PanѶavas on the Battlefield of Kurukӌetra.

Gayatri ١ Transcendental vibration sung for spiritual enlighten-
ment by duly qualified twice-born classes.

DhӄtaraӌӖra ١ The father of the Kauravas. The Bhagavad-gita was
narrated to King DhӄtaraӌӖra by his secretary, while it was spoken
on the battlefield of Kurukӌetra.

Godasa ١ Servant of the senses.

Draupadi ١ Daughter of King Drupada and the wife of the
PanѶavas.
Duryodhana ١ The chief malicious son of DhӄtaraӌӖra; it was to
establish Duryodhana as the world ruler that the Kurus fought the
Battle of Kurukӌetra.
Duӌkӄtam ١ Miscreants who do not surrender to Krishna.
Dvapara-yuga ١ The third age in the cycle of a maha-yuga.
It lasts for over 864,000 years.
E
Ekadaĝi ١ A special day for increased remembrance of Krishna,
observed by devotees twice a month by fasting and hearing and
chanting the glories of the Lord.
G
Gandharvas ١ The celestial musicians.
GaҰѶiva ١ The name of Arjuna's bow.
Ganges ١ The sacred river that flows throughout the entire universe
from the lotus feet of ViӌҰu. Bathing in the Ganges is recommended
for purification.
Garbhodakaĝayi ViӌҰu ١ The ViӌҰu expansion of the Supreme Lord,
who enters each universe to create diversity.

Goloka ١ A name for Krishna's planet.
Gosvami ١ Go ١ senses and svami ١ master master of the senses.
Govinda ١ Name of Krishna. "One who gives pleasure to the earth,
cows, and senses." Gӄhasta ١ The stage of life as a householder. One
who lives a married life being God-conscious and raises a family in
Krishna consciousness.
GuҰa ١ Material quality of which there are three: ignorance, pas-
sion, and goodness.
GuҰavataras ١ The three incarnations controlling the three modes
of material nature. Brahma controls passion, ViӌҰu controls good-
ness, and Ĝiva controls ignorance.
Guru ١ Spiritual master.
H
Hanuman ١ The famous monkey devotee who served the Supreme
Lord in His incarnation as Lord Ramacandra and helped defeat the
demon RavaҰa.
Hare Krishna Hare Krishna, Krishna Krishna, Hare Hare Hare Rama, Hare
Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare ١ The maha-mantra, or great chant
for deliverance. Krishna and Rama are names of the Lord, and
Hare refers to the Lord's energy. These names are particularly
recommended for chanting in this age.
Haridasa ӕhakur ١ A great devotee recommended by Lord Cai-
tanya as the namacarya teacher of the holy name .
HaӖha-yoga ١ A system of physical exercises to help control the
senses.

196

Glossary

197

HiraҰyakaĝipu ١ A great atheist killed by Krishna in His incarnation
as NӄsiҪhadeva.

J³ana-yoga ١ The predominantly empirical process of linking with
the Supreme, which is executed while still engaged in mental
speculation.

HiraҰyakaĝipu's son was the great devotee Prahlada Maharaja.
Hӄӌikeĝa ١ A name of Krishna, the master of the senses.
I

J³ani ١ One dedicated to the cultivation of knowledge especially
through philosophical speculation .
Upon perfection, a j³ani surrenders to Krishna.
K

Ikӌvaku ١ A son of Manu who received knowledge of the Bhagavad-
gita in the past.
Indra ١ The King of the celestial planets.

Kala ١ Time, the controlling factor in the material world.

Indraloka ١ The planet where Lord Indra resides.

Kali ١ 1 The current age of quarrel and hypocrisy; 2 the goddess
in charge of this age.

ìĝavasya ١ Iĝa ١ the Lord and vasya ١ controller the concept that
the Lord possesses and controls everything, and everything should
be used in His service.

Kala-cakra ١ The wheel of time, a representation of the eternal cycle
of birth and death in the material world.

Iĝvara ١ Controller. Krishna is Parameĝvara, the supreme controller.
J

Kaliya ١ A poisonous serpent defeated by Lord Krishna.
Kalki ١ The future incarnation of Lord ViӌҰu, who will appear to
annihilate the miscreants at the end of the Kali-yuga.
Kama ١ Lust.

Janaka ١ A great self-realized king, the father-in-law of Lord
Ramacandra.

Kama-rĭpa ١ Taking a form due to lust.

Japa ١ Softly chanting the holy names of God, performed with the
help of 108 beads for counting prayers.

Kama-yoga ١ The yoga of regulated sense gratification.

Kama-yaj³a ١ Performing sacrifice for sense gratification.

Jiva ١ Jivatatma the atomic soul or living entity.

Kamya ١ Desire for material enjoyment.

J³ana ١ Knowledge. Material j³ana does not go beyond the material
body. Transcendental j³ana discriminates between matter and
spirit. Perfect j³ana is knowledge of the body, the soul, and the
Supreme Lord.

KaraҰa Ocean ١ The causal ocean, from which all universes emerge.

J³ana-kaҰѶa ١ The division of the Vedas dealing with empirical
speculation in search of the Truth.

KaraҰodakaĝayi ViӌҰu ١ The form of ViӌҰu lying on the ocean of
causality.
Kardama Muni ١ A great sage and husband of Devahĭti; the father
of Lord Kapila.
Karma ١ Action, work.

198

Glossary

199

Karma-bandhana ١ The bondage of fruitive activities.

Lakӌmi ١ The goddess of fortune and eternal consort of Lord ViӌҰu.

Karma-kaҰѶa ١ The section of the Vedas dealing with rituals and
fruitive activities.

Lila ١ Divine pastimes of the Lord.

Karma-yoga ١ The yoga of selfless action, performing one's duties
without attachment to the results.

Lokaloka Mountain ١ A mountain that divides the material and
spiritual worlds.
M

Karmi ١ One engaged in fruitive activities.
Kaĝyapa ١ A great sage and one of the Prajapatis; the father of
demigods and demons.
Krishna ١ The Supreme Personality of Godhead, the source of all
incarnations, the Supreme Lord.
Krishna consciousness ١ Awareness of one's relationship with Krishna,
the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Krishna-lila ١ The pastimes and activities of Lord Krishna.
Krishna-prema ١ Pure love for Krishna.
Krishna-yaj³a ١ The process of chanting the holy names of Krishna in
this age.
Kӌatriya ١ The warrior or administrative class in the Vedic social
system.
KuҰѶalini ١ The dormant spiritual energy located at the base of the
spine, often associated with yogic practices.
Kuru ١ The dynasty to which the PaҰѶavas and Kauravas belong.
Kurukӌetra ١ The battlefield where the great war of the Mahab-
harata took place, and where Lord Krishna spoke the Bhagavad-gita.
Kuvera ١ The treasurer of the demigods, the guardian of the
northern direction, and the lord of the Yakӌas.
L
Lakӌmana ١ The wife of Lord Ramacandra.

Madana-mohana ١ A name of Lord Krishna, meaning "one who
captivates the mind." Mahabharata ١ One of the two great epics
of ancient India, containing the Bhagavad-gita.
Mahadeva ١ Lord Ĝiva, the great demigod who is the master of the
mode of ignorance.
Maha-mantra ١ The great chanting mantra: Hare Krishna, Hare
Krishna, Krishna Krishna, Hare Hare, Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama
Rama, Hare Hare.
Mahaprabhu ١ A title for Lord Caitanya, meaning "the great
master" or "the great Lord." Mahatma ١ A great soul, a spiritually
advanced person.
Mahavakya ١ A Vedic aphorism that reveals the identity of the
individual soul with the Supreme Soul.
Maha-yaj³a ١ The great sacrifice, referring to the performance of
one's prescribed duties in a spirit of selfless service to the Supreme.
Mahayana ١ A major school of Buddhism that emphasizes compas-
sion and enlightenment for all beings.
Maharӌi ١ A great sage.
Mahat-tattva ١ The cosmic intelligence, the total material sub-
stance.
Mahatma ١ A great soul, a spiritually advanced person.
Maha-viӌҰu ١ The first expansion of Lord Krishna, from whom the
material universes emanate.

200

Glossary

Manas ١ The mind, one of the internal senses.
Manohara ١ Another name of Lord Krishna, meaning "one who
enchants the mind." Mantra ١ A sacred sound or vibration used
in meditation or ritual.
Manusya ١ The human species.
Marici ١ A great sage and one of the Prajapatis; a son of Lord
Brahma.
Material nature ١ The physical and subtle elements that constitute
the material world.
Medhavi ١ Intelligent.

201
NaimiӌaraҰya ١ A sacred forest where sages perform rituals and
discuss spiritual topics.
Nama ١ The holy names of the Lord.
Nama-saҮkirtana ١ Congregational chanting of the holy names of
the Lord.
Nama-yaj³a ١ The process of chanting the holy names as a sacrifice.
Narada Muni ١ A great sage and a pure devotee of the Lord, who
travels between diॸerent planetary systems.
NarayaҰa ١ The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord ViӌҰu.

Meghananda ١ One who bestows bliss like a cloud that brings rain.

Narottama dasa ӕhakura ١ A great GauѶiya VaiӌҰava saint and
poet, renowned for his devotional songs.

Meru ١ The central mountain in the universe.

Navadvipa ١ A holy city in Bengal, the birthplace of Lord Caitanya.

Mind ١ The faculty of consciousness and thought within a living
being.

NirguҰa ١ Without material qualities, referring to the spiritual
nature of the Supreme.

Mitra ١ The sun-god, one of the twelve Âdityas.

NirvaҰa ١ Liberation from the cycle of birth and death, a concept
in Buddhism.

Mohini-mĭrti ١ The feminine form assumed by Lord ViӌҰu to
bewilder the demons.
Mokӌa ١ Liberation from the cycle of birth and death.
Mukhya-praҰa ١ The chief life air or vital force.
Mukunda ١ A name of Lord Krishna, meaning "one who gives liber-
ation." Mumukӌu ١ One who aspires for liberation from material
existence.

Nirviĝeӌa ١ Without specific attributes, indicating the transcenden-
tal nature of the Absolute Truth.
Nitya-baddha ١ Conditioned souls who are eternally bound within
the material world.
Nitya-mukta ١ Liberated souls who are eternally free from material
bondage.

Muni ١ A sage or saintly person.

Nitya-siddha ١ Eternally liberated souls who never fall into the
material world.

N

NӄsiҪha-deva ١ The half-man, half-lion incarnation of Lord ViӌҰu
who appeared to protect His devotee Prahlada.

Nabhigupta ١ A name for the sun-god, Sĭrya.
Naga ١ A class of serpent-like demigods, often associated with
water bodies.

O

202

Glossary

203

Om ١ The universal sound vibration representing the Supreme
Absolute Truth.

Paĝupata-vrata ١ A vow taken by Paĝupatas, followers of Lord Ĝiva,
to conquer and dominate others.
PaӖala ١ One of the lower planetary systems beneath the earth.

P
Padma ١ The goddess of fortune and eternal consort of Lord ViӌҰu.
Padma PuraҰa ١ One of the eighteen MahapuraҰas, containing
details about various incarnations of the Lord.

PaӖava ١ A type of cloth, often worn as a garment.
Pati ١ The Supreme Lord or master.
Pavana ١ Purifying or sanctifying.
Perfection of life ١ Achieving self-realization and love of God.

PaҰѶava ١ The five sons of King PaҰѶu: YudhiӌӖhira, Bhima, Arjuna,
Nakula, and Sahadeva.

Perverted reflection ١ The material world is considered a perverted
reflection of the spiritual world.

PaҰѶuranga ١ A name for Lord ViӌҰu, particularly worshipped at
the famous pilgrimage site of Pandharpur in Maharashtra, India.

Phala ١ Fruits or results of actions.

Para-brahman ١ The Supreme Absolute Truth, beyond the manifest
and unmanifest material worlds.
Parameĝvara ١ The Supreme Controller, referring to Lord Krishna.
Paraĝara Muni ١ A great sage and father of Vyasadeva, who
compiled the Vedas.
Parikrama ١ Circumambulation, especially the devotional practice
of walking around sacred places or deities.
Parikӌit Maharaja ١ The saintly king who received the teachings of
Ĝukadeva Gosvami before his death.
Paropakara ١ The principle of doing good to others, serving the
welfare of others.
Partha ١ Another name for Arjuna, derived from his mother Pӄtha
Kunti .
Parva ١ A division or section, often used to refer to the various
books or parts of the Mahabharata.
PaĝaҰѶi ١ An atheist or one who rejects the authority of the
revealed scriptures.

Phalena pariciyate ١ A tree is known by its fruits; similarly, a person
is recognized by their actions.
Piety ١ Virtuous and moral conduct; religious and moral duties.
Pitӄ-loka ١ The realm of the ancestors, one of the higher planetary
systems.
Pitӄs ١ Ancestors or forefathers.
Prabhupada ١ A title of honor meaning "he who has taken shelter
at the lotus feet of the Lord." It is often used to refer to A. C.
Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada.
Prahlada Maharaja ١ A great devotee of Lord ViӌҰu and the son of
the demon HiraҰyakaĝipu.
Prakӄti ١ Material nature, consisting of the three modes of material
nature guҰas .
Prakӄti-loka ١ The material universe.
PraҰa ١ The vital air or life force within the body.
PraҰayama ١ Breath control, a yogic practice to regulate the life air.
Prasada ١ Mercy, especially referring to sanctified food oॸered to
the Lord and then distributed to His devotees.

204

Glossary

PratiӌӖha ١ Desire for personal recognition or fame.
Prema ١ Pure love of God.
Preta ١ A ghost, spirit, or departed soul in a lower form.
PuraҰa ١ A genre of ancient Indian literature that contains stories
of the creation, cosmology, and genealogies of deities and heroes.
Puruӌa ١ The living entity or the Supreme Person, referring to both
the individual soul and the ultimate spiritual reality.
Puruӌartha ١ The four primary goals of human life: dharma reli-
gious duty , artha economic development , kama sense gratifica-
tion , and mokӌa liberation .
Puruӌottama ١ A name for Lord Krishna, meaning "the Supreme
Person." Puruӌottama-yoga ١ The divine knowledge that leads to
the understanding of the Supreme Person, as described in the
Bhagavad-gita.
Purĭrava ١ A king of the lunar dynasty, known for his association
with the celestial nymph Urvaĝi.

205
ࢲalities of a devotee ١ Desirable characteristics developed by a
devotee, such as humility, tolerance, and compassion.
ࢲeen Kunti ١ The mother of the PaҰѶavas and a great devotee of
Lord Krishna.
R
Radha ١ The eternal consort of Lord Krishna and the personification
of pure devotion.
Radha-Krishna ١ The divine couple, Lord Krishna and Ĝrimati Rad-
haraҰi.
Radha-krishna-lila ١ The pastimes and activities of Lord Krishna and
Ĝrimati RadharaҰi.
RadharaҰi ١ Another name for Ĝrimati RadharaҰi, the beloved of
Lord Krishna.
Rakӌasa ١ A demon or evil spirit, often hostile to the demigods.

Puruӌa-sĭkta ١ A Vedic hymn describing the cosmic form of the
Supreme Person.

Rama ١ 1 Lord Ramacandra, the seventh incarnation of Lord
ViӌҰu; 2 Balarama, the elder brother of Lord Krishna.

Pĭtana ١ A demoness who assumed the form of a nurse to kill the
infant Krishna.

Rama-ayana ١ The epic poem narrating the life and adventures of
Lord Ramacandra, composed by Valmiki.

PuҰya ١ Pious or virtuous activities that lead to good results.

Rama-candra ١ Another name for Lord Ramacandra, meaning "the
moon-like Lord." Rama-devi ١ Another name for Sita, the wife of
Lord Ramacandra.

PuҰѶarika ١ A lotus flower, often symbolizing spiritual purity.
PuҰѶarikakӌa ١ A name for Lord ViӌҰu, meaning "one with lotus-
petal eyes." PuҰѶarikakӌi ١ A name for Lakӌmi, the goddess of
fortune.

Rama-lila ١ The pastimes and activities of Lord Ramacandra.

Puӌkara ١ A sacred lake in India; also, a name for Lord Brahma.

Rama-rajya ١ The ideal rule or kingdom of Lord Ramacandra,
known for justice and righteousness.

PuӌӖa Krishna ١ Another name for Lord Krishna, meaning "one who
nourishes and maintains all living beings."

Rasa ١ 1 Aesthetic or emotional experience; 2 the transcendental
mellow exchanged between the Supreme Lord and His devotees.

Q

Rasabja ١ A lotus flower, often symbolizing the heart.

206

Glossary

Rasatala ١ One of the lower planetary systems, below the earth.
Rasika ١ One who relishes or enjoys the transcendental mellows of
devotional service.
Ӄӌi ١ A sage or saintly person who has realized the truths of
spiritual science through direct experience.
Ӄtam ١ The eternal and unchanging order in the universe, repre-
senting the divine principles.
Ӄtu ١ Season; one of the six divisions of the year.
Ӄӌabhadeva ١ An incarnation of the Supreme Lord who appeared
in the Treta-yuga.

207
Salokya ١ A liberation where one resides on the same planet as the
Supreme Lord.
Salokya-mukti ١ Liberation where one resides on the same planet
as the Supreme Lord.
Salokya-rĭpa ١ Liberation where one attains a form similar to that
of the Supreme Lord.
Samanya ١ Common; referring to the commonality of the material
elements.
SamaҮya-ĝastra ١ The science of the common principles underlying
various branches of knowledge.

ӃӌyaĝӄҮga ١ A sage born with the horns of a deer, famous for his
association with the Mahabharata.

SaҮkhya ١ One of the six classical systems of Indian philosophy, fo-
cused on analytical knowledge and the distinction between matter
and spirit.

S

SaҮkhya-yoga ١ The path of analytical knowledge and renunciation
of material attachment.

Sacrifice yaj³a ١ A ritualistic ceremony performed to please the
Supreme Lord and demigods, often involving oॸerings of food and
other items.

SaҮkirtana ١ Congregational chanting or singing of the holy names
of the Lord.

Sadhu ١ A saintly person or devotee of the Lord; one who follows
the path of righteousness.
Sadhu-saҮga ١ Association with saintly persons or devotees of the
Lord.
Sadhyas ١ A class of demigods responsible for executing the orders
of Lord Brahma.

SaҮkirtana-yaj³a ١ The congregational chanting of the holy names
of the Lord as the recommended sacrifice for the present age.
SaҮkhya ١ The path of analytical knowledge and renunciation of
material attachment.
Sannyasa ١ The renounced order of life, characterized by detach-
ment from material possessions and a focus on spiritual realization.
Sannyasi ١ A person in the renounced order of life.

Sage ١ A wise and learned person, often used to refer to spiritual
teachers and ascetics.

Sanatana-dharma ١ The eternal, natural principles of duty and
righteousness.

Sakӌat ١ Directly; referring to the direct presence or manifestation
of the Supreme.

Sara ١ Essence or substance.

Sakӌat-kara ١ Direct perception or realization of the Supreme.

Sarasvati ١ 1 The goddess of learning and wisdom; 2 a river
mentioned in the Vedas.

208

Glossary

209

Sarga ١ The process of creation or the initial creation of the material
world.

ĜaҮkhacĭѶa ١ A demon defeated by Lord Krishna during His pas-
times.

Sarvaj³a ١ The all-knowing; a title for the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.

ĜaҮkhasura ١ A demon in the form of a conch-shell defeated by
Lord Krishna.

Sat ١ Existence; the eternal and unchanging reality.

Ĝanta ١ Peaceful or pacified.

Sat-cit-ananda ١ The Supreme Absolute Truth characterized by
eternity, knowledge, and bliss.

Ĝanti ١ Peace; also refers to a ritualistic ceremony performed for
peace and well-being.

Sat-cit-ananda-vigraha ١ The transcendental form of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, characterized by eternity, knowledge, and
bliss.

ĜaraҰagati ١ Surrender; taking shelter of the Supreme Lord.

Satvata ١ Connected with the Satvata dynasty or related to Lord
Krishna.
Satvata-tantra ١ A scripture describing the worship of Lord Krishna.

Ĝarira ١ The physical body.
Ĝariri ١ The soul residing within the body.
ĜarҰagati ١ Surrender; taking shelter of the Supreme Lord.

Satya-loka ١ The topmost planetary system within the material
universe.

Ĝarva ١ Another name for Lord Ĝiva, meaning "the auspicious one."
ĜarҮga-dhana ١ A name of Lord Krishna, referring to His holding the
bow named ĜarҮga.

Satya-yuga ١ The first and most virtuous age in the cycle of four
yugas.

Ĝata-kumbha ١ A sage who became intoxicated by power and was
later defeated by Lord Krishna.

Ĝastra ١ Sacred scriptures or authoritative texts.

Ĝatrughna ١ The youngest brother of Lord Ramacandra, known for
killing the demon LavaҰa.

Ĝatru ١ An enemy.
Ĝatru-saҮga ١ Association with worldly-minded or non-devotees.
Satyabhama ١ One of the principal queens and wives of Lord Krishna.
Satya-saҮkalpa ١ One whose desires are always fulfilled.
Satyavrata ١ A king who later became the sage Ĝraddhadeva, also
known as Vaivasvata Manu.
ĜaҮkara ١ 1 Lord Ĝiva, one of the principal demigods; 2 Âdi
ĜaҮkaracarya, a philosopher and founder of the Advaita Vedanta
school.
ĜaҮkara-bhagavata ١ A scripture describing the glories of Lord
Ĝiva.

Ĝavitri ١ The sacred Gayatri mantra, a prayer to the sun-god for
enlightenment.
Ĝeӌa ١ 1 The divine serpent who serves as the bed of Lord ViӌҰu;
2 the embodiment of time.
Ĝiӌya ١ A disciple or student.
Ĝloka ١ A verse or stanza, typically in the form of a couplet.
Ĝmaĝana ١ A cremation ground.
ĜӄҮgara ١ The aesthetic or romantic mellow in devotional service.
ĜӄҮgara-rasa ١ The mellow of romantic or conjugal love in devo-
tional service.

210

Glossary

211

ĜӄҰgara ١ The mellow of romantic or conjugal love in devotional
service.

Ĝruti ١ The Vedic literature that is heard or directly received from
the Supreme.

Ĝri ١ Auspicious or radiant; a term of respect used before the names
of demigods, sages, or important personalities.

Ĝrutis ١ The four Vedas: Ӄg, Sama, Yajur, and Atharva.

Ĝri Caitanya Mahaprabhu ١ The combined incarnation of Lord
Krishna and Ĝrimati RadharaҰi, who appeared in the fifteenth cen-
tury to spread the congregational chanting of the holy names.
Ĝri Devi ١ The goddess of fortune, eternal consort of Lord ViӌҰu.
Ĝridama ١ A cowherd boy and close friend of Lord Krishna.
Ĝridhara ١ A name of Lord ViӌҰu or Krishna, meaning "one who holds
the goddess of fortune." Ĝridhara Svami ١ A medieval commentator
on the Bhagavatam.

Sthana ١ A place or abode.
Sthira ١ Steady or fixed.
Sthĭla-ĝarira ١ The gross or physical body.
Sĭkӌma-ĝarira ١ The subtle body, including the mind, intelligence,
and false ego.
Sĭrya ١ The sun-god.
Sĭta ١ A professional reciter or storyteller of ancient times; also, the
name of a sage who spoke the PuraҰas to the sages at NaimiӌaraҰya.

Ĝri-guru ١ The spiritual master, representing the divine guidance in
spiritual life.

Sĭta Gosvami ١ The sage who narrated the PuraҰas to the sages at
NaimiӌaraҰya.

Ĝri Krishna Caitanya ١ Another name for Lord Caitanya, emphasiz-
ing His identity as Lord Krishna in the mood of Ĝrimati RadharaҰi.

Sĭta-saҮhita ١ A scripture narrated by Sĭta Gosvami, containing
information on various subjects.

Ĝrimad-Bhagavatam ١ The most celebrated of the eighteen PuraҰas,
presenting the glories and pastimes of Lord Krishna.

Ĝĭdra ١ The fourth social division in the Vedic system, traditionally
responsible for service and support roles.

Ĝrimad-Bhagavad-gita ١ A sacred scripture consisting of a con-
versation between Lord Krishna and Arjuna on the battlefield of
Kurukӌetra.

Sĭkti ١ Skillful or eॸective words or expressions.

Ĝrimati ١ A title of respect used before the names of goddesses or
highly respected women.
Ĝrimati RadharaҰi ١ The eternal consort of Lord Krishna and the
personification of pure devotion.
Ĝripada ١ A respectful term meaning "the Lord's feet" or "a holy
place." Ĝrivasa ӕhakura ١ A great devotee and associate of Lord
Caitanya.
Ĝrivasa-aĝrama ١ The home of Ĝrivasa ӕhakura, a great devotee and
associate of Lord Caitanya.

Sumeru ١ The central mountain in the universe.
Sumitra ١ One of the wives of King Daĝaratha and the mother of
Lord LakӌmaҰa and Ĝatrughna.
Sun-god Sĭrya ١ A powerful demigod and source of light and
energy in the universe.
Suniti ١ The mother of Dhruva Maharaja and a great devotee.
Supersoul ١ The localized aspect of the Supreme within the heart
of every living being, providing guidance and witnessing activities.
Supreme Personality of Godhead ١ The ultimate and absolute form
of God, possessing all divine qualities and opulence.

212

Glossary

Svadha ١ One of the daughters of Dakӌa and the wife of Pitӄloka
the demigods in charge of ancestors .
Svarga ١ The heavenly planets, one of the higher planetary systems
in the material universe.
Svarga-loka ١ The heavenly planets, one of the higher planetary
systems in the material universe.
Svarga-vasa ١ The residents of the heavenly planets.

213
Tattva-darĝi ١ One who has realized the truth or reality.
Tattva-j³a ١ One who knows the truth or reality.
Tattva-saҮkhyana ١ Analytical knowledge of the ultimate truth or
reality.
Tattva-vit ١ One who knows the truth or reality.
Tavan ١ That; indicating the Supreme Absolute Truth.

Svayam ١ Personally; indicating a direct or personal presence.

Tirtha ١ A holy place of pilgrimage, often associated with a sacred
river or deity.

Svayam Bhagavan ١ The original and complete form of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Tirtha-yatra ١ Pilgrimage to holy places.

Svena ١ By His own; indicating the independent nature of the
Supreme Lord.

Toĝana ١ Satisfying; pleasing.
Trahi ١ Please protect or deliver.
Trayi ١ The three Vedas: Ӄg, Sama, and Yajur.

T
Tamas ١ The mode of ignorance, characterized by darkness, inertia,
and delusion.

Tri-daҰѶa ١ The triple staॸ carried by renunciants as a symbol of
their vows.
Trigunatmaka ١ Composed of the three modes of material nature.

Tamas-guҰa ١ The mode of ignorance, one of the three modes of
material nature.

Trijagat ١ The three worlds: the upper, middle, and lower planetary
systems.

Tamasi ١ Pertaining to the mode of ignorance.

Trimĭrti ١ The three principal deities: Brahma, ViӌҰu, and Ĝiva.

Tamasik ١ Influenced or dominated by the mode of ignorance.

Tri-pada ١ Three-footed; referring to Lord ViӌҰu as described in the
Ӄg Veda.

Tamasika ١ Influenced or dominated by the mode of ignorance.
Tamasvati ١ Another name for the goddess of fortune, especially
when she becomes angry.
Taraka-brahma ١ The transcendental sound vibration that delivers
one from the material world.
Taraka-ĝakti ١ The divine energy that helps one cross over the
material ocean.
Tattva ١ Truth or reality.

Tri-sama ١ The threefold Sama Veda, a collection of Vedic hymns
chanted during rituals.
Trivikrama ١ Another name for Lord ViӌҰu, meaning "one who
takes three steps." Tu ١ But; however.
Tulasi ١ The sacred basil plant, dear to Lord Krishna.
Tumburu ١ A Gandharva celestial musician and a great devotee
of the Lord.

214

Glossary

215

Turiya ١ The fourth state of consciousness, transcending waking,
dreaming, and deep sleep.

Upadhi ١ Designations or material designations that cover the soul.

U
UcchiӌӖa ١ The remnants of food left by others, considered purifying
when oॸered to the Lord.
Udara ١ Generous or magnanimous.
Udara-dhiҎ ١ Broad-minded or magnanimous.
Uddhava ١ A cousin and devotee of Lord Krishna, known for his close
association with Him.
Ugra ١ Fierce or powerful.
Ugra-karma ١ Fierce activities, often related to violence or harm.
Ujjvala-rasa ١ The mellow of transcendental conjugal love, espe-
cially as experienced by the gopis in Vӄndavana.
Ulĭka ١ An owl.
Unmana ١ Not thinking or beyond the mind.
Unmatta ١ Mad or intoxicated.
Upadana ١ The material cause or substance from which something
is made.
Upadana-karaҰa ١ The material cause or substance from which
something is made.

Upadhyaya ١ A teacher or spiritual guide.
Upakara ١ Benevolence or kindness.
Upanayana ١ The sacred thread ceremony, marking the initiation
of a boy into Vedic studies.
Upasaka ١ A worshiper or devotee.
Upasana ١ Worship or devotional service.
Upavasa ١ Fasting; abstaining from food or specific activities as an
austerity or religious observance.
Urdhva-puҰѶra ١ The tilaka marks Vaishnava tilaka worn by
devotees on the forehead and other parts of the body.
Urdhvareta ١ One who practices celibacy and retains the semen for
spiritual advancement.
Uru ١ Thighs; also refers to a particular Vedic meter.
Uru-krama ١ Another name for Lord ViӌҰu, meaning "one whose
steps cover the three worlds." Uĝa ١ The daughter of Asura BaҰa
and a beloved of Aniruddha, a grandson of Lord Krishna.
Utkarӌa ١ Excellence or superiority.
Utseka ١ Elevation or promotion.
Uttama ١ The highest; superior.

Upadeĝa ١ Instruction or advice.

Uttama-bhakti ١ The highest form of devotional service, character-
ized by pure love of God.

Upadeĝa-ratna ١ A jewel of instruction; a valuable piece of advice
or teaching.

Uttama-adhikari ١ The most advanced devotee, who sees the equal-
ity of all living beings and engages in pure devotional service.

Upadeĝa-sara ١ The essence of all instructions; the most important
teachings.

Uttama-puruӌa ١ The Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Upadeĝa-sahasri ١ A classic work by Ĝrila Rĭpa Gosvami, consist-
ing of a thousand verses on devotional service.

Uttara-yaga ١ A sacrifice performed for obtaining a son.

Uttara ١ The daughter of King ViraӖa and wife of Abhimanyu.

216

Glossary

Uttara-phalguni ١ The nakӌatra lunar mansion under which Ar-
juna was born.
V
Vaijayanti ١ A special flower garland worn by Lord ViӌҰu or Krishna.
Vaijayanti-mala ١ A garland of victory; a flower garland worn by
Lord ViӌҰu or Krishna.

217
Vakya ١ A sentence or statement.
Valmiki ١ The sage who composed the RamayaҰa, an epic poem
narrating the life of Lord Ramacandra.
Varaha ١ The boar incarnation of Lord ViӌҰu, who lifted the Earth
from the cosmic ocean.
VaraҰasi ١ A sacred city in India, also known as Kaĝi or Benares.
VaraҰasi ١ A sacred city in India, also known as Kaĝi or Benares.

Vaiĝeӌika ١ One of the six classical systems of Indian philosophy,
focused on atomism and metaphysics.

VarӌҰeya ١ Another name for Arjuna, indicating his descent from
the Vrishni dynasty.

Vaiĝeӌika-sĭtra ١ The foundational text of the Vaiĝeӌika school,
attributed to the sage KaҰada.

VaruҰa ١ The demigod presiding over the cosmic waters and the
lord of justice.

VaiӌҰava ١ A devotee of Lord ViӌҰu or Krishna.

Vasana ١ Subtle impressions or desires stored in the mind.

VaiӌҰava-saҮga ١ Association with devotees of Lord ViӌҰu or
Krishna.

Vasara ١ A particular time, often referring to the day of the week.

VaiӌҰava-seva ١ Service to the devotees of Lord ViӌҰu or Krishna.
VaiӌҰavi ١ A female devotee of Lord ViӌҰu or Krishna.

Vasudeva ١ A name for Lord Krishna, indicating His descent as the
son of Vasudeva.

VaiӌҰavism ١ The devotional tradition centered around the worship
of Lord ViӌҰu or Krishna.

Vasudeva-katha ١ Topics related to Lord Krishna, especially His
pastimes and teachings.

Vaiӌya ١ The third social division in the Vedic system, traditionally
engaged in agriculture, commerce, and business.

Vasudeva-sĭtra ١ A concise philosophical statement describing the
Supreme Absolute Truth as Vasudeva.

Vaitaliya ١ A form of mystic power or a particular goddess associ-
ated with occult practices.

Vasudeva-para ١ Devotees who are exclusively dedicated to Lord
Krishna.

Vaiyasaki ١ A name for Yamuna, the sacred river associated with
Lord Krishna's pastimes.

Vasudevi ١ Another name for Ĝrimati RadharaҰi, the eternal con-
sort of Lord Krishna.

Vajra ١ The thunderbolt weapon, often associated with the demigod
Indra.

Vasuki ١ The king of serpents, used as a rope during the churning
of the milk ocean.

Vak ١ Speech or the power of speech; also refers to the goddess of
speech, Sarasvati.

Vata ١ Air; the principle of air or wind.

Vasava ١ Another name for Lord Indra, the king of the demigods.

Vayu ١ The demigod presiding over the air and wind.

218

Glossary

219

Vayuputra ١ A son of Lord Vayu, often referring to Lord Hanuman.

Vikarma ١ Prohibited or forbidden activities; sinful actions.

Vayu-tattva ١ The principle of air or wind, one of the five basic
elements.

Vikrama ١ Heroic activity or prowess.

Veda ١ The ancient scriptures of India, divided into four collections
known as Ӄg, Sama, Yajur, and Atharva Vedas.
Veda-vada ١ The ritualistic study and performance of Vedic cere-
monies without understanding their deeper spiritual significance.
Vedanta ١ The philosophical end or conclusion of the Vedas; a
system of knowledge exploring the nature of reality and the self.
Vedanta-sĭtra ١ The foundational text of Vedanta philosophy, also
known as the Brahma-sĭtra, compiled by Vyasa.

VikuҰӖha ١ The spiritual world, the eternal abode of Lord ViӌҰu or
Krishna.
VikuҰӖha-loka ١ The spiritual world, free from the limitations of
the material realm.
Vilapa-kusuma³jali ١ A poetic work expressing the gopis' lamenta-
tion during Lord Krishna's separation.
Vilasa ١ Pastime or playful activity.
Vilasa-ma³jari ١ One of the eternal associates of Lord Krishna in His
pastimes.

Vedic ١ Pertaining to the Vedas, the ancient sacred scriptures of
India.

Vinaya ١ Humility or gentleness.

Vedopaniӌad ١ The Upaniӌads, which contain the philosophical
essence of the Vedas.

Vinayaka ١ Another name for Lord Ganeĝa, the elephant-headed
demigod.

Vegavat ١ One who is controlled or restrained.

Vira ١ Heroic or valiant.

Vegavati ١ A river mentioned in the PuraҰas, often associated with
Lord Krishna's pastimes.

Vira-bhakti ١ Heroic devotion; intense and valiant devotional ser-
vice.

VeҰu ١ The flute; also, a name for Lord Krishna, who is often depicted
playing the flute.

Vira-rasa ١ The mellow of heroism or chivalry in devotional service.

VeҰu-gita ١ The song sung by Lord Krishna while playing His flute,
especially during the rasa dance.
Vidura ١ A wise and saintly character in the Mahabharata, known
for his devotion to Lord Krishna.
Vidya ١ Knowledge or learning.
Vidyadharas ١ A class of celestial beings possessing mystical knowl-
edge and powers.
Vidya-sagara ١ The ocean of knowledge.
Vikara ١ Transformation or modification.

ViraӖa ١ The universal form or cosmic manifestation of the Supreme
Lord.
ViraӖa-rĭpa ١ The universal form or cosmic manifestation of the
Supreme Lord.
ViraӖa-puruӌa ١ The universal form or cosmic manifestation of the
Supreme Lord.
Viӌaya ١ Sense objects or material enjoyment.
Viӌaya-buddhi ١ The consciousness that is attached to sense objects
or material enjoyment.

220

Glossary

221

ViӌҰu ١ 1 The Supreme Personality of Godhead; 2 the second
person of the Hindu Trinity, also known as NarayaҰa.

ViĝeӌӖa-guҰa ١ Distinguished qualities; referring to the specific
attributes of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

ViӌҰu-maya ١ The internal, spiritual potency of the Supreme Lord,
responsible for creation and maintenance.

Viĝva ١ The universe or the whole creation.

ViӌҰu-puraҰa ١ A scripture that narrates the glories and pastimes
of Lord ViӌҰu.
ViӌҰu-sahasranama ١ The thousand names of Lord ViӌҰu, found in
the Mahabharata.
ViӌҰu-tattva ١ The category of divinity that includes Lord ViӌҰu
and His expansions.
ViӌҰu-vardhana ١ One who enhances or increases the glories of
Lord ViӌҰu.
ViӌҰu-yama ١ The last three muhĭrtas each of 48 minutes of the
night, considered auspicious for spiritual activities.
Viĝala ١ Expansive or vast.
Viĝala-rĭpa ١ Having a vast or universal form; another name for
Lord ViӌҰu's universal form.

Viĝva-rĭpa ١ The universal form or cosmic manifestation of the
Supreme Lord.
Viĝvajit ١ One who conquers or controls the entire universe.
Viĝvakarma ١ The celestial architect and engineer, often identified
with Lord Brahma.
Viĝva-mĭrti ١ The all-pervading form of the Supreme Lord.
Viĝvamitra ١ A sage and king who became a powerful brahmaҰa
through austerities.
Viĝvamitra-gayatri ١ A sacred mantra dedicated to Lord Viĝvami-
tra, revealing his exalted position.
Viĝvasa ١ Faith or trust.
ViĝvasaҪ pĭrvam asit ١ The phrase used to express complete
confidence in spiritual knowledge.

Viĝeӌa ١ Distinct or special.

Viĝveĝa ١ The Lord of the universe; another name for Lord ViӌҰu
or Krishna.

Viĝeӌa-darĝi ١ One who sees the uniqueness or distinctiveness of
devotional service.

ViĝvottirҰa ١ Beyond the material world; transcendent.

Viĝeӌa-j³a ١ One who knows the distinctions or special features of
devotional service.
Viĝeӌa-pĭjana ١ The special worship of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.
Viĝeӌa-yoga ١ The special knowledge of devotional service.
Viĝeӌa-yogi ١ One who practices the special process of devotional
service.
ViĝeӌӖa ١ Distinguished or preeminent.

ViӌҰu-dhĭta ١ Messengers of Lord ViӌҰu or Krishna, who deliver the
souls of devotees to the spiritual world.
ViӌҰu-loka ١ The abode of Lord ViӌҰu, also known as VaikuҰӖha.
ViӌҰu-pada ١ The lotus feet of Lord ViӌҰu or Krishna; a title of respect
used for advanced devotees.
ViӌҰu-pĭja ١ Worship of Lord ViӌҰu or Krishna.

mroof

