SITUATIONAL GITA
Ancient Solutions to Modern Life Struggles



Ancient Solutions to Modern Life Struggles

Situational Gita

Ancient Solutions to Modern Life Struggles

ANCIENT SOLUTIONS TO MODERN LIFE STRUGGLES

ANCIENT SOLUTIONS TO MODERN LIFE STRUGGLES




What is Bhagavad gita

The Bhagavad-gita, is one of the most revered texts in all the Vedic literature and a vast storehouse of knowledge and philosophy. A part of the epic poem The Mahabharata attributed to the sage Vyasa, it encapsulates the essence of Vedanta. Composed of seven hundred Sanskrit verses, the Bhagavad-gita is a dialogue between Prince Arjuna and Sri Kṛṣṇa, Arjuna’s charioteer, friend and council. 

This conversation is about what constitutes right action, proper understanding and, ultimately, the meaning of life and the nature of the Divine.

It is curious that such an ancient text from a foreign culture has been so enthusiastically received by Westerners. As a truly great work of literature, can be read on many levels: metaphysical, moral, spiritual, and practical; hence its appeal. 

These texts are powerful spiritual tools. Like Arjuna, you can benefit from these timeless teachings in your quest for self-confidence and self-determination. As you read, allow the spiritual wisdom of these teachings to resonate within you and feel self realization grow as a result.

This work is based on the verse translations from Bhagavad gita As It Is by A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada.
















The Bhagavad-gita is considered to have answers to all our questions regarding struggles in life. Situational Gita is our attempt to present learnings from the Bhagavad-Gita curated for application in today's world.
English translations of carefully selected slokas from the Gita are available in each category. The text goes on to suggest situations in modern life where these can come most useful.
The book has categories at the end to be used as an index to the themes.


Why Bhagavad gita?

* This is where you put forward - What's in it for them  
What is the aim?

One of the main reasons the Gita is so cherished is due to its promotion and discussion of the path of self realization. Besides the Gita, many of the sacred texts and Vedic teachings advocate a complete renunciation of the world to lead the life of an ascetic or hermit. The Gita tells us that this is both a difficult and unnecessary practice. Kṛṣṇa recommends the path of Karma Yoga or selfless service as the superior and quickest path to realizing the Divine. Once one is established in Karma Yoga, then one can proceed with the deeper practice of meditation, instructs Kṛṣṇa. Towards the end of the Gita, Kṛṣṇa places great importance on the role of devotion and faith in attaining the supreme destination. All the techniques and philosophies that Kṛṣṇa recommends are easily practiced and incorporated into your normal daily life and the Gita gives exact information regarding God, the soul, material nature, birth, death and life after death. 



After studying intensively in various temples around the world serving as a travelling monk for eight years, I received initiation as a Brahmin, becoming part of the Gaudiya Vaisnava tradition. Since then, my main activity has been to deepen and spread the Dharma shastras, the various branches of Vedic wisdom, and apply them for practical purposes in the modern world.

I went to Australia from 1999 to 2004 to give my two children a spiritual education at a Vaishnava school, where I faced the death of my wife in 2000. I raised my children on my own and I learned to organize my life in a spiritual, Kṛṣṇa conscious way.

I achieved and have had results in the spiritual and in material life, such as the successful upbringing of my children, published two different magazines and my own books. You can see my published works and translations here: www.bhaktiyoga.es

In this book, I am sharing with you my realizations and experience on Bhagavad-gita. I hope it can serve you to significantly improve some aspect of your spiritual and material well-being.

Plot Summary

The Bhagavad-gita opens with blind King Dhritarashtra requesting his secretary, Sanjaya, to narrate the battle between his sons, the Kauravas, and their cousins, the Pandavas. 
Lord Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, out of affection for His devotee, the Pandava prince Arjuna, has agreed to drive his chariot. As Arjuna takes up his bow and prepares to fight, he sees the sons of Dhritarashtra drawn in military array and requests infallible Kṛṣṇa to draw his chariot between the two fighting forces. 
There in the midst of both armies, Arjuna’s mind reels as he foresees the imminent death of his teacher, relatives, and friends. He throws down his bow and arrows and decides not to fight. Overcome with sorrow, Arjuna sinks into despair at the thought of the inevitable bloodshed. He tells Kṛṣṇa that he cannot be a part of any action that will result in so much death and misery. 

A

Anger
Bg. 2.56
Bg. 2.62
Bg. 2.63
Bg. 5.26
Bg. 16.1-3
Bg. 16.21

Abortion
Absolute Truth
Acharya, Spiritual Leader
Acintya-bhedabheda-tattva
Action
Agriculture
Ahankara
Ahimsa
Anger
Association
Astronomy
Atheism
Atma
Atonement
Attachment (material)
Austerity
Avatar(s)


B
Balarama
Bhagavad-gita
Bhakti yoga
Body, material
Brahma

C

Confusion
Bg. 2.7
Bg. 3.2
Bg. 18.61

Celibacy
Chaitanya Mahaprabhu
Chanting
Children
Christianity
Compassion
Conduct
Congregational chanting
Consciousness
Cooking and vegetarianism
Cows and cow protection
Creation
Culture



D

Dealing with envy
Bg. 12.13
Bg. 12.14
Bg. 16.19
Bg. 18.71

Death of a loved one
Bg. 2.13
Bg. 2.20
Bg. 2.22
Bg. 2.25
Bg. 2.27

Demotivated
Bg. 11.33
Bg. 18.48
Bg. 18.78

Depression
Bg. 2.3
Bg. 2.14
Bg. 5.21

Discriminated
Bg. 5.18
Bg. 5.19
Bg. 6.32
Bg. 9.29

Death and dying
Deity worship
Demigods
Demons
Desires, spiritual
Destiny and fate
Detachment (from matter)
Determination
Devotee (of Kṛṣṇa)
Devotional service
Dharma
Disciplic succession
Disease
Doubts
Duty



E
Economics
Education
Ekadasi (fasting day)
Evolution


F

Fear
Bg. 4.10
Bg. 11.50
Bg. 18.30

Feeling sinful
Bg. 4.36
Bg. 4.37
Bg. 5.10
Bg. 9.30
Bg. 10.3
Bg. 14.6
Bg. 18.66

Forgetfulness
Bg. 15.15
Bg. 18.61

Forgiveness
Bg. 11.44
Bg. 12.13
Bg. 12.14
Bg. 16.1
Bg. 16.2
Bg. 16.3

Faith
False ego
Fame
Family life
Farming
Fear
Festivals
Forms of God
Forms of God (avatars, incarnations)
Four regulative principles
Free will



G

Greed 
Bg. 14.17
Bg. 16.21
Bg. 17.25


Gambling
Gardening
Getting Old
Goal of life
God
God realization
Grief
Guru




H

Happiness
Hare Kṛṣṇa Maha-mantra
Hare Kṛṣṇa Movement
Hearing spiritual topics, importance of
Hell
Hinduism
History 
Holidays
Holy places
Homosexuality
Husbands and fathers


I

Identity
Illusion
Impersonalism
Initiation, spiritual
Intelligence



J

Janmashtami
Japa
Job



K

Kali-yuga
Kama
Karma
Kirtan 
Knowledge, types of
Kṛṣṇa
Kṛṣṇa Consciousness
Kṛṣṇa's attributes and qualities
Kṛṣṇa's devotees
Kṛṣṇa's divinity
Kṛṣṇa's energies
Kṛṣṇa's eternal home
Kṛṣṇa's expansions
Kṛṣṇa's forms
Kṛṣṇa's love
Kṛṣṇa's pastimes
Kṛṣṇa's teachings


L

Laziness
Bg. 3.8
Bg. 3.20
Bg. 6.16
Bg. 18.39

Loneliness
Bg. 6.30
Bg. 9.29
Bg. 13.16
Bg. 13.18

Losing hope
Bg. 4.11
Bg. 9.22
Bg. 9.34
Bg. 18.66
Bg. 18.78

Lust
Bg. 3.37
Bg. 3.41
Bg. 3.43
Bg. 5.22
Bg. 16.21

Lamentation 
Laws of nature
Liberation
Life, origin of
Life, perplexities of
Life's purpose
Love of God
Lust 



M

Maha-mantra
Mantra meditation
Mantra(s)
Marriage
Material attachment
Material world
Maya
Mayavada
Meat-eating
Meditation
Mental illness
Mercy
Mind
Modes of nature
Moksha 
Money




N

Nature, laws of


O

Observations
Origin of life



P

Pride
Bg. 16.4
Bg. 16.13
Bg. 16.14
Bg. 16.15
Bg. 18.26
Bg. 18.58

Paramatma
Parampara
Parenting
Peace
Peace in the world
Peace of mind
Peace, formula for... 
Personalism
Personalism/Impersonalism
Pilgrimage
Planetary systems
Practices
Prasadam 
Prayer
Puranic time (cyclical)
Pure devotee(s)
Pure devotional service
Purpose of life



Q


R

Radharani
Rama
Rasas
Reincarnation
Relationships
Relationships with Kṛṣṇa
Religion
Renunciation



S

Seeking peace
Bg. 2.66
Bg. 2.71
Bg. 4.39
Bg. 5.29
Bg. 8.28

Sadhana
Sanatana dharma 
Sankirtana 
Sanskrit
Sat-cit-ananda
Science
Science and religion
Scriptures
Self
Self-realization
Sense gratification
Sex (licit and illicit)
Shiva
Simple living
Sin
Sinful reaction
Six Goswamis
Sorrow And Regret
Soul 
Sound vibrations, spiritual
Spirit
Spiritual body
Spiritual food
Spiritual masters
Spiritual nature 
Spiritual practice
Spiritual world
Spirituality
Srimad-Bhagavatam
Suffering
Supersoul
Supreme Personality of Godhead



T

Temptation
Bg. 2.60 
Bg. 2.61
Bg. 2.70
Bg. 7.14

Teacher
Temple worship
Testimonials
Time
Transmigration
Truth, absolute
Tulasi



U

Uncontrolled mind
Bg. 6.5
Bg. 6.6
Bg. 6.26
Bg. 6.35


V

Vaikuntha
Varnashrama-dharma system



W


X


Y


Z
____________





Glossary

adharma
the opposite of dharma; includes all forms of injustice, evil, and immorality.

ahimsa
the sanskrit word for nonviolence.

akasha
the sanskrit word for the sky.

akshara
the equivalent of the syllable Om; a verbal equivalent of the eternal.

ashvattha
a holy tree, which Kṛṣṇa references in his depictions of the extent of divine power.

atman
the Self or deepest part of the soul in every being that is often concealed by illusions, deceit and delusion.

avatar
an avatar is a form that a God takes in order to come to Earth. Since Gods do not come to Earth in their most powerful, divine forms, they take the shape of animals, humans, or other recognizable earthly creatures.

Bhagavad-gita
The Gita literally means 'Song of the Lord' and recounts the conversation between Arjuna and Kṛṣṇa before Arjuna goes to fight the Kauravas for the kingdom of Hastinapura.

bhakti
the sanskrit word for love and devotion.

brahmin
the priestly and learned class in Vedic society.

deva
another word for demigod in Vedic texts. Vishnu, Shiva, and Brahma together make up the three main devas.

dharma
one of the key concepts of the Gita; literally translates to 'law' or 'duty'. Every being is subject to a cycle of birth and death in which one has to come to Earth to work off their karma by fulfilling their dharma -or duty- in a given lifetime. In the Gita, it is Arjuna's karma that he must rescue his kingdom from the evil Kauravas, but his dharma is that he must fight in battle in order to do so -his dharma as a kshatriya, a warrior.

guna
The gunas are referenced often in the Gita as the three qualities which can be used to categorize much of earthly beings and phenomena. The three gunas are satva, or harmony and purity, rajas or energy/passion, and tamas, which is darkness/ignorance.

jnana
the sanskrit word for the highest form of wisdom.

karma
the most important concept in the Gita, explaining the cycle of birth and rebirth. People have a debt of karma to work off in their lifetime, and do so either by fulfilling or avoiding their dharma. Every action has a karmic consequence and so karma either accumulates or dissolves until the cycle of birth and rebirth ends.

kshatriya
A kshatriya is a member of the warrior class, which is traditionally the ruling class of Vedic societies.

lila
Kṛṣṇa's spiritual pastimes in Vṛndāvana with the cowherds boy and with the gopīs. Also Kṛṣṇa manifests, exhibits the līlā, coming to Earth personally so that you may hear about Kṛṣṇa and you may be attracted or in other words for the facility of the conditioned soul.

maya
the illusion that masks the divine. This mask is sometimes conjured by the divine himself, as when he takes a disguise or an avatar. Or it is conjured by man himself in an attempt to deny the true form of divinity in order to pursue selfish actions.

prakriti
the energy of the world from which the physical world appears 

prana
the sanskrit word for breath.

purusha
there are two purushas or controllers, the Supreme Personality of Godhead and the uncontaminated living entity.

samsara
the cycle of birth and death that ends only when a person fully dissolves karma.

tyaga
the hindu word for total renunciation.

vijnana
the act of living with the highest form of knowledge; it's putting jnana to work in everyday life.

yoga
yoga, literally "skill in action," is the process of achieving union with God. Achieving yoga means not only being selfless in action but achieving true meditation on the divine at all points in one's life, even the smallest of moments.


Yoga vs. Renunciation
A number of Eastern religions preach a strict form of asceticism which involves learning to renounce action and will. Renunciation becomes a process, then, of casting off worldly possessions and obligations and proceeding on a quest for nirvana, as the Buddha did. But Vaishnavism, as dictated by the Gita, urges yoga instead of renunciation. Yoga is literally "skill in action," or the process of using selfless action -action designed to unite with the divine- as the true process for achieving enlightenment. For we cannot help but act. It is our nature and because of that, we must learn to act in accordance with the divine, not as the result and in service to our own egos, which are nothing more than destructive illusions.

Sattva vs. Rajas
The three gunas, offer three different qualities which can either support or infect our lives on Earth. The ideal, or the least destructive guna, is sattva -which supports harmony, purity, and balance in the body. Rajas is its opponent, born of passion and often a primary driver of ego, anger, greed, and lust. And finally, there is tamas, or disconnection -a person eagerly clouds themselves in ignorance and darkness to avoid the process of reaching yoga. These three gunas present a person's unnatural inclinations. If a person is aware of which one he is naturally born to, as a result of his karma, then he can slowly move toward sattva and eventually towards pure goodness (vishuda sattva) which is free from the burden of the gunas.


Karma vs. Dharma
The terms dharma and karma often get confused by introductory students and with good reason -- they are both products of the samsaric cycle of birth and death, but they have entirely different spheres of purpose. Karma is the accumulation of debt of action in the course of a person's samsaric cycle. Every action has a reaction and over the course of a lifetime, if one is in accordance with the divine, he will gradually work off his or her karma. If he is acting selfishly and for ego, then he will accumulate more karma to work off. Reborn, each person finds their "dharma" or duty in order to work off this karma. Some are born to wealthy families, others to poor ones, some to spiritual families, others to evil-doing ones. The question isn't what you are born to, but how you use your life to dissolve as much karma as possible in order to end the samsaric cycle.

Proof vs. Faith
One of the more subtle themes in the Gita is the contrast between faith and evidence -and humanity's inclination to want to "see" something in order to believe it. But Arjuna keeps asking for evidence, or practicalities of how to achieve yoga and meditation, and Kṛṣṇa finally offers him the sight of him in His universal form. Why Kṛṣṇa doesn't demand total and blind faith is an interesting theme in the Gita, and one that requires careful attention.

Theory vs. Action
Arjuna is constantly asking Kṛṣṇa for pragmatic advice of how to put the Gita into concrete action. This emphasis on action is at the core of the entire work. What Kṛṣṇa gives Arjuna, then, are clear steps and hierarchies for achieving the path of yoga. First off, he says meditation is the most important element, for meditation allows a focus on the divine that will inform every aspect of one's life. Second, there is selfless service, and finally, though not as powerful, one can also turn to blind renunciation. Kṛṣṇa sees enlightenment as a process that requires self-control and self-discipline in a series of concrete steps.

Seen vs. Unseen
Kṛṣṇa makes the distinction between the seen world and the unseen world -both products of his divine energies. The unseen world is the energy of which all things are born. It is the spiritually unseen realm that forms everything that comes of prakriti, the material world. As humans, we have a tendency to put a primacy only on what we see instead of believing in a higher realm. Kṛṣṇa wants Arjuna to have faith in the unseen as the guide of all his actions.

Jnana vs. Vijnana
Jnana is knowledge -and Kṛṣṇa preaches knowledge as the first step towards liberation. The self-awareness that comes with understanding the role of the divine in everything we do will help guide a person towards yoga. But this is not enough. Kṛṣṇa also encourages vijnana, or the act of using jnana in life, as the key to finding spiritual peace. Vijnana is simply yogic action -or being able to maintain self-awareness at every moment in life -even at the moment of death.

CHARACTER LIST

Ananta
Ananta is the cosmic serpent that is often seen with Vishnu as part of His avatar.

Arjuna
Arjuna is the central figure of the Gita. He is Kṛṣṇa's disciple, and asks Him for help when he has to fight his own family in order to take command of a kingdom that is rightfully his brother Yudhishthira's. He is one of the five Pandava brothers, and next in line to take over Hastinapura. At first, Arjuna is weak of heart, unsure how he can fight his kin for a kingdom. But Kṛṣṇa shows him that fighting and ruling is his duty.

Aryaman
Aryaman is mentioned in passing in the Gita as a God in the Vedas who was an ancestor of mankind.

Ashvatthama
Ashvatthama is also mentioned in passing in the Gita, and should be noted only as a great archer and warrior, who is Drona's son.

Bhisma
Bhisma fights against Arjuna, as one of the elders of the opposing Kaurava family. Arjuna and Sanjaya make it a point to extol Bhisma's courage and will.

Brahma
Brahma is one of the most revered Vedic deities, and is also known as the Creator. Brahma shouldn't be confused with Brahman, which is impersonal, as opposed to a manifested deity.

Buddha
Kṛṣṇa makes reference to the Buddha, who renounced all material possessions and his worldly life to seek enlightenment. He found nirvana in the course of his journey during the sixth century B. C.
€€€
Dhritarashtra
Dhritarashtra is the king of the Kurus. Blind since birth, he serves as the king of Hastinapura, but is not the rightful ruler. The Gita begins with Dritarashtra aiming to keep the kingdom in the hands of his family, and willing to battle against Arjuna, the rightful heir, in order to keep it. Dhritarashtra's sons are the Kauravas, who fight against Arjuna and his Pandava brothers.

Drona
Drona is the general of the Kaurava army who fights against Arjuna and his Pandava brothers.

Duryodhana
Duryodhana is the son of Dhriharashtra, who tries to bequeath him a kingdom which isn't rightfully his.
 Duryodhana, then, is the antagonist of the upcoming battle documented in the Gita, and Arjuna's chief enemy in battle.

Gandiva
Arjuna's bow, gifted from the deities, is called gandiva.

Garuda
Garuda is the eagle which serves as Vishnu's form of transport.

Indra
Indra is mentioned in the Gita as the god of battle.

Janaka
Janaka is referenced by Kṛṣṇa as a king in ancient times who was wise, ruled effectively, and found a sattvic way of presiding over his people.

Kauravas
The Kauravas are the sons of Kuru, or rather the sons of Dhritarashtra. Duryodhana and his brothers are the Kauravas and they fight against Arjuna and the Pandavas.

Kṛṣṇa
Kṛṣṇa is the main character of the Gita. Here in battle, he serves as Arjuna's charioteer, and comes to earth precisely to help Arjuna see his dharmic duty. In the Gita, Kṛṣṇa asserts full omnipotence as the ultimate deity, and reveals both his human and most divine form. Kṛṣṇa's name literally means 'The infinite fascinant.'

Madhava
Madhava is another name for Kṛṣṇa.

Manu
Manu is known as the father of the human race, or the "first man" of mankind.

Pandavas
The sons of "Pandu" are the Pandavas, and include Arjuna and his brothers Bhima, Nakula, Sahadeva, and Yudhishthira. Arjuna and the Pandavas have to fight the Kauravas for the kingdom of Hastinapura because the Pandavas have the rightful claim to it.

Pritha
Pritha is mentioned in passing as Arjuna's mother.

Rama
Rama was the son of Dasharatha and the king of Ayodha. He is famous for being the titular hero of the Ramayana, who slayed the demon Ravana to rescue his wife Sita.

Sanjaya
Sanjaya is the wise sage who recounts the Gita epic to the blind king Dritarashtra, who cannot witness what is happening on the battlefield.

Shiva
Shiva completes the "Trinity" of deities with Brahma and Vishnu -and is also known as the Destroyer.

Vishnu
Vishnu is the Preserver, responsible for maintaining dharma in the world -and thus comes to the earth in various incarnations, to right the balance of good and evil.

Yudhishthira
Arjuna's brother, and the rightful heir to the kingdom.


## Structure  
  
* Introduction  
	* Start with a greeting  
		* Many people say, start with a BANG  
			* Careful as bang can also NOT work  
	* Who / Why me  
		* Topic has higher billing than the speaker  
		* Good starter  
			* For those of you I haven't met yet, My name is <NAME>, I've been doing this for 15 years and working internationally  
				* It covers everyone in the room  
				* It's all inclusive  
	* The AIM  
		* Most important item  
		* The aim is ..... so that .....  
			* The aim of this talk about the value webinars in your Marketing mix so that when evaluating options , you know what to look at and where to look for it  
			* This is where you put forward - What's in it for them  
		* If you don't have an aim, don't present  

Chapters
CHAPTER I
Lamenting the Consequence of War 
the stage is set for the conversation between Lord Kṛṣṇa & Arjuna in the battlefield of Kurukshetra in about c. 3102 B.C.
SECTION 1
SECTION 1 

Who are you? 

We lost our mind, we don't know who we are. We suffer from amnesia of our real identity.








Chapter 1
LAMENTATION
The story opens to the scene of a battlefield just prior to the start of a colossal war. Gathered on the battlefield of Kurukshetra, the Pandavas and the Kauravas are preparing for war. The stage is set for the conversation between Lord Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna.
Description of the forces involved

As the opposing armies stand poised for battle, Arjuna, the mighty warrior, sees his intimate relatives, teachers and friends in both armies ready to fight and sacrifice their lives. 

Dhrtarashtra asks Sanjaya about the current situation in the battlefield:

 Dhrtarashtra said: O Sanjaya, after assembling in the place of pilgrimage at Kurukshetra, what did my sons and the sons of Pandu do, being desirous to fight? (Bg. 1.1).

 Duryodhana, son of Dhrtarashtra and leader of the opposing army expresses his confidence in victory:

Our strength is immeasurable, and we are perfectly protected by Grandfather Bhisma, whereas the strength of the Pandavas, carefully protected by Bhima, is limited (Bg. 1.10).

Lamentation of Arjuna

Arjuna patrols the battlefield and asks his divine charioteer, Kṛṣṇa, to place his chariot between the two armies so he can see who he has to fight. To his dismay, Arjuna sees in both armies friends, family, teachers, and respected elders, all willing to fight and die.  

Arjuna said: 0 infallible one, please draw my chariot between the two armies so that I may see who is present here, who is desirous of fighting, and with whom I must contend in this great battle attempt (Bg. 1.21-22).

He ponders that the kingdom is not necessarily worth the deaths of so many people. He worries that killing is a sinful act, especially if he is killing members of his own family. 

Sin will overcome us if we slay such aggressors. Therefore it is not proper for us to kill the sons of Dhrtarashtra and our friends. What should we gain, 0 Kṛṣṇa, husband of the goddess of fortune, and how could we be happy by killing our own kinsmen? (Bg. 1.36).

Knowing that by engaging in this war, family members and friends will be lost on both sides of the battle line, Arjuna is faced with a personal and ethical crisis. 

Arjuna expounds his reasons for his non violence, presents his arguments for refusing to fight. Basically, he says fears the sinful reactions of killing:

O Janardana, although these men, overtaken by greed, see no fault in killing one's family or quarreling with friends, why should we, with know­ledge of the sin, engage in these acts?  (Bg. 1.37-38).

The corruption of women and the subsequent unwanted progenie:

When irreligion is prominent in the family, 0 Kṛṣṇa, the women of the family become corrupt, and from the degradation of womanhood, 0 descendant of Vrishni, comes unwanted progeny (Bg. 1.40).

Thus, the destruction of the family tradition:

Due to the evil deeds of the destroyers of family tradition, all kinds of community projects and family welfare activities are devastated (Bg. 1.42).

Overcome by grief and pity, Arjuna fails in strength, his mind becomes bewildered, and he gives up his determination to fight:

Sañjaya said: Arjuna, having thus spoken on the battlefield, cast aside his bow and arrows and sat down on the chariot, his mind overwhelmed with grief (Bg. 1.46).

Prabhupāda: Hm. So the history is, that same family, there was dispute who would occupy the throne. Dhṛtarāṣṭra and... Actually he was the eldest son of the king, and next was Pāṇḍu. So every country the law of primogeniture, what is called? The eldest child... In your country, even the eldest child is a girl, she also occupies the throne. 

So two parties... Dhṛtarāṣṭra was the eldest son, but he was blind, bodily defective. Therefore he was not awarded the throne. His next brother, Pāṇḍu, he was offered the throne, but he died very early age, a young man. When these Pāṇḍus, the five sons, Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja---at that time not Mahārāja---Yudhiṣṭhira, Bhīma, Arjuna, Nakula, Sahadeva, they were very small children, so they were taken care of by Dhṛtarāṣṭra and other elderly family... Bhīṣmadeva. He was the grandfather of the Pāṇḍavas. He was the elder uncle of Dhṛtarāṣṭra. Bhīṣma was elder brother of Dhṛtarāṣṭra's father. He was so old. But he was... Actually, the kingdom belonged to Bhīṣma, but he remained a brahmacārī; he did not marry. There was no issue of Bhīṣmadeva. Therefore his nephews, Dhṛtarāṣṭra and Pāṇḍu, they were inheritor.
Now, after the death of Pāṇḍu, there was conspiracy. Dhṛtarāṣṭra wanted that "Actually, this is my kingdom. Now, somehow or other, I could not get it. Now my brother is dead. So if I do not inherit, why not my sons.?" This was the politics. Politics are always there, and enviousness, jealousy. This is the nature of this material world. You cannot avoid it. Spiritual world means just the opposite. There is no politics. There is no jealousy. There is no enviousness. That is spiritual world. And material world means politics, jealousy, diplomacy, enviousness, so many things. This is material world. So even in the heavenly planets, these things are there, politics. Even in animal kingdom these politics are there. This is the nature. Matsaratā. Matsaratā means enviousness. One man is envious of another man. It doesn't matte even they are brothers or family members. Here the family members, Dhṛtarāṣṭra and Pāṇḍu, two brothers, their sons, they were family members, but the enviousness.


So the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is not for the persons who are envious. It is a movement to train people how to become not envious. It is very first class scientific movement, yes. Not to become envious. Therefore Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam in the beginning introduces, dharmaḥ projjhita-kaitavo atra [SB 1.1.2]. In this Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, dharma, religious principle, cheating type of religious principle is completely eradicated, thrown away, projjhita. They are kicked out, projjhita. Just like you collect all the dirty things from the room, sweeping, and then kick out, don't keep it within the room. Similarly, cheating type of religious system---kicked out. It is not such religion, "this religion," "that religion." Any religion system, if there is jealousy, that is not religion. Jealousy means... We should understand jealousy, what is jealousy. Jealousy means that you are rightful owner of something, I won't allow you to take it. This is jealousy. This is jealousy. Jealousy, try to understand. Suppose you are rightful owner of something, and I am trying that "You don't own it. I shall own it," or "Somebody own it, I shall not allow it." This is jealousy.


So formerly, when there was fight between two kings, it is on the principle that who is giving good protection to the citizens, not for personal profit. Who is able to give good protection, life, security for life and property, he should become king. So these persons, this Dhṛtarāṣṭra and his sons, they were jealous. How they could give protection to the citizens? They are themselves jealous. Just like nowadays, all these politicians, they are jealous. They cannot give any protection to the citizens. They are simply interested with their party politics. They have no time even to think how to give nice protection to the citizen so that they may feel happy always, that "We have got good government. There is no cause of anxiety. We have got sufficient food, sufficient protection, sufficient opulence---everything sufficient." That is good government.


So here Dhṛtarāṣṭra says, samavetā yuyutsavaḥ [Bg. 1.1] = "All these people, my sons," māmakāḥ... Māmakāḥ. That means "my sons," and pāṇḍava, "and my brother Pāṇḍu's sons," samavetā, "they assembled." What is the purpose? The purpose is yuyutsavaḥ. This word yuyutsu is still used in Japan. Perhaps you know, yuyutsa, fighting. So yuyutsu, those who are desirous of fighting. Now, both the parties were desiring to fight, and they assembled. Why he is asking question, kim akurvata: "What did they do?" Because he was little doubtful that "These boys, after being assembled in dharma-kṣetra kuru-kṣe..., they might have changed their ideas. They might have settled up." Actually, the sons of Dhṛtarāṣṭra might have admitted, "Yes, Pāṇḍavas, you are actually the owner. What is the use of unnecessarily fighting?"

Kim akurvata sañjaya [Bg. 1.1]. He was asking his secretary. He was blind man. He was always conducted by his secretary, Sañjaya, a very faithful secretary. And he is explaining the Bhagavad-gītā by experiencing, by television within the heart. That art is not yet developed. You have got television through machine, but there is another television---you can see within your heart everything, what is going on outside. So that television was known to... That will be explained by Sañjaya, that by the grace of Vyāsadeva, he learned this televisioning, and he was sitting with his master within the room, and he was actually seeing how the fighting is going on, and he was explaining. This is the basic principle of Bhagavad-gītā, I mean, the basic platform. So let us discuss gradually, one after an...




Chapter 2
IDENTITY  

Arjuna accepts the position of a disciple of Kṛṣṇa and requests him to instruct on how to dispel his grief. This chapter also summarizes the contents of the Gita.
Confusion of Arjuna and reproaches of Kṛṣṇa

Kṛṣṇa begins His teachings to Arjuna by telling him to stop posing as a person that cares and knows. 

The Blessed Lord said: While speaking learned words, you are mourning for what is not worthy of grief. Those who are wise lament neither for the living nor the dead.
Never was there a time when I did not exist, nor you, nor all these kings; nor in the future shall any of us cease to be.  

eleven-twelve verses after knowing who am I comes our duty

The soul and the body

 Kṛṣṇa continues His discourse by explaining the fundamental distinction between the temporary material body and the eternal spiritual soul:

Know that which pervades the entire body is indestructible. No one is able to destroy the imperishable soul. 

For the soul there is never birth nor death. Nor, having once been, does he ever cease to be. He is unborn, eternal, ever-existing, undying and primeval. He is not slain when the body is slain.

Kṛṣṇa explains the process of transmigration:

As the embodied soul continually passes, in this body, from boyhood to youth to old age, the soul similarly passes into another body at death. The self-realized soul is not bewildered by such a change.

Kṛṣṇa encouraged Arjuna to fight

The science of action

Considering your specific duty as a ksatriya, you should know that there is no better engagement for you than fighting on religious principles; and so there is no need for hesitation.    

Do thou fight for the sake of fighting, without considering happiness or distress, loss or gain, victory or defeat -and, by so doing, you shall never incur sin.    

Those who are on this path are resolute in purpose, and their aim is one. 0 beloved child of the Kurus, the intelligence of those who are irresolute is many-branched.   

You have a right to perform your prescribed duty, but you are not entitled to the fruits of action. Never consider yourself to be the cause of the results of your activities, and never be attached to not doing your duty.  

Be steadfast in yoga, 0 Arjuna. Perform your duty and abandon all attachment to success or failure. Such evenness of mind is called yoga.

The Path of Yoga

The nature of selfless service to the Supreme:

O Dhananjaya, rid yourself of all fruitive activities by devotional service, and surrender fully to that consciousness. Those who want to enjoy the fruits of their work are misers.   
A man engaged in devotional service rids himself of both good and bad actions even in this life. Therefore strive for yoga, 0 Arjuna, which is the art of all work.    
The wise, engaged in devotional service, take refuge in the Lord, and free themselves from the cycle of birth and death by renouncing the fruits of action in the material world. In this way they can attain that state beyond all miseries.

The self realized soul 

Characteristics of a self-realized person:
 
The Blessed Lord said: 0 Partha, when a man gives up all varieties of sense desire which arise from mental concoction, and when his mind finds satisfaction in the self alone, then he is said to be in pure transcendental consciousness.
One who is not disturbed in spite of the threefold miseries, who is not elated when there is happiness, and who is free from attachment, fear and anger, is called a sage of steady mind.
He who is without attachment, who does not rejoice when he obtains good, nor lament when he obtains evil, is firm ly fixed in perfect knowledge.

Sense control

One who is able to withdraw his senses from sense objects, as the tortoise draws his limbs within the shell, is to be understood as truly situated in knowledge.

One who can control his senses by practicing the regulated principles of freedom can obtain the complete mercy of the Lord and thus become free from all attachment and aversion.

Steadiness and peace

For one who is so situated in the Divine consciousness, the threefold miseries of material existence exist no longer; in such a happy state, one's intelligence soon becomes steady.

A person who is not disturbed by the incessant flow of desires-that enter like rivers into the ocean which is ever being filled but is always still-can alone achieve peace, and not the man who strives to satisfy such desires.

A person who has given up all desires for sense gratification, who lives free from desires, who has given up all sense of proprietorship and is devoid of false ego-he alone can attain real peace.


How to combat depression
O son of Prtha, do not yield to this degrading impotence. It does not become you. Give up such petty weakness of heart and arise, O chastiser of the enemy.
O son of Kunti, the nonpermanent appearance of happiness and distress, and their disappearance in due course, are like the appearance and disappearance of winter and summer seasons. They arise from sense perception. 0 scion of Bharata, and one must learn to tolerate them without being disturbed.
Such a liberated person is not attracted to material sense pleasure or external objects but is always in trance, enjoying the pleasure within. In this way the self-realized person enjoys unlimited happiness, for he concentrates on the Supreme. 

Seek instruction when in a confused state
Now I am confused about my duty and have lost all composure because of weakness. In this condition I am asking You to tell me clearly what is best for me. Now I am Your disciple, and a soul surrendered unto You. Please instruct me.

Words on the death of a loved one

As the embodied soul continually passes, in this body, from boyhood to youth to old age, the soul similarly passes into another body at death. The self-realized soul is not bewildered by such a change. 
For the soul there is never birth nor death. Nor, having once been, does he ever cease to be. He is unborn, eternal, ever-existing, undying and primeval. He is not slain when the body is slain. 
As a person puts on new garments, giving up old ones, similarly, the soul accepts new material bodies, giving up the old and useless ones. 
It is said that the soul is invisible, inconceivable, immutable, and un­ changeable. Knowing this, you should not grieve for the body. 
For one who has taken his birth, death is certain; and for one who is dead, birth is certain. Therefore, in the unavoidable discharge of your duty, you should not lament. 

How to manage Anger

One who is not disturbed in spite of the threefold miseries, who is not elated when there is happiness, and who is free from attachment, fear and anger, is called a sage of steady mind. 

Temptation

The senses are so strong and impetuous, 0 Arjuna, that they forcibly carry away the mind even of a man of discrimination who is endeavoring to control them.
One who restrains his senses and fixes his consciousness upon Me is known as a man of a steady inteligence.
A person who is not disturbed by the incessant flow of desires-that enter like rivers into the ocean which is ever being filled but is always still­ can alone achieve peace, and not the man who strives to satisfy such desires. 

Origin of anger

While contemplating the objects of the senses, a person develops attach­ ment for them, and from such attachment lust develops, and from lust anger arises. 
From anger, delusion arises, and from delusion bewilderment of memory. When memory is bewildered, intelligence is lost, and when intelligence is lost, one falls down again into the material pool. 
Those who are free from anger and all material desires, who are self­ realized, self-disciplined and constantly endeavoring for perfection, are assured of liberation in the Supreme in the very near future. 
There are three gates leading to this hell-lust, anger, and greed. Every sane man should give these up, for they lead to the degradation of the soul. 


Seeking peace

One who is not in transcendental consciousness can have neither a controlled mind nor steady intelligence, without which there is no possi­bility of peace. And how can there be any happiness without peace? 
A person who has given up all desires for sense gratification, who lives free from desires, who has given up all sense of proprietorship and is devoid of false ego-he alone can attain real peace. 
There are three gates leading to this hell-lust, anger, and greed. Every sane man should give these up, for they lead to the degradation of the soul. 

One should perform sacrifice, penance and charity with the word tat. The purpose of such transcendental activities is to get free from the material entanglement. 



→ TAKE AWAYS

The way to achieve happiness is to tolerate all desires and remain satisfied by engaging in duty, while fixing consciouness in the Supreme.

Chapter 3
DUTY  

Kṛṣṇa delivers a stern talk to Arjuna about the duties every member of the society needs to carry out. Arjuna opens the chapter asking Kṛṣṇa why He is encouraging fighting if intelligence is better than fruitive work.

Arjuna said: O Janardana, O Kesava, why do You urge me to engage in this ghastly warfare, if You think that intelligence is better than fruitive work?

Kṛṣṇa then explains ‘karma-yoga’, reaction-free devotional work, and clears up Arjuna’s mistaken idea that all work is fruitive and leads to bondage:

All men are forced to act helplessly according to the impulses born of the modes of material nature; therefore no one can refrain from doing something, not even for a moment. 
One who restrains the senses and organs of action, hut whose mind dwells on sense objects, certainly deludes himself and is called a pretender. 
On the other hand, he who controls the senses by the mind and engages his active organs in works of devotion, without attachment, is by far superior.
Perform your prescribed duty, for action is better than inaction. A man cannot even maintain his physical body without work. 
Kṛṣṇa explains that Arjuna should fight, for avoiding sinful reactions though devotional work is better than attempting to escape reactions though renouncing work. 

Work done as a sacrifice for Vishnu has to be performed, otherwise work binds one to this material world. Therefore, 0 son of Kunti, perform your prescribed duties for His satisfaction, and in that way you will always remain unattached and free from bondage. 

Kṛṣṇa also instructs Arjuna to fight to set the proper example of duty.

A self-realized man has no purpose to fulfill in the discharge of his prescribed duties, nor has he any reason not to perform such work. Nor has he any need to depend on any other living being. 

Kṛṣṇa therefore tells Arjuna to fight, but with knowledge and detachment , without falling victim to his own attractions and aversions: 

Attraction and repulsion for sense objects are felt by embodied beings, but one should not fall under the control of senses and sense objects because they are stumbling blocks on the path of self-realization. 

Bewildered by the modes of material nature, the ignorant fully engage themselves in material activities and become attached. But the wise should not unsettle them, although these duties are inferior due to the performers' lack of knowledge.


The enemy

Arjuna’s question on the cause of a soul’s being impelled to improper action or neglect of duty:

Arjuna said: O descendant of Vrishni, by what is one impelled to sinful acts, even unwilil ngly, as if engaged by force? 
Kṛṣṇa names the enemy: lust.

The Blessed Lord said: It is lust only, Arjuna, which is born of contact with the material modes of passion and later transformed into wrath, and which is the all-devouring, sinful enemy of this world. 
Reveals the site of the enemy:
The senses, the mind and the intelligence are the sitting places of this lust, which veils the real knowledge of the living entity and bewilders him. 
He then recommends Arjuna to regulate his senses, become fixed in his pure identity as a servant of Kṛṣṇa, and thereby avoid lust’s control. Then, with spiritual strength and deliberate intelligence, he should conquer that forceful enemy –lust.
Thus knowing oneself to be transcendental to material senses, mind and intelligence, one should control the lower self by the higher self and thus­ by spiritual strength, conquer this insatiable enemy known as lust. 

Action and Inaction

It is far better to discharge one's prescribed duties, even though they may be faulty, than another's duties. Destruction in the course of per­ forming one's own duty is better than engaging in another's duties, for to follow another's path is dangerous.

Everyone must engage in some sort of activity in this material world. But actions can either bind one to this world or liberate one from it. By acting for the pleasure of the Supreme, without selfish motives, one can be liberated from the law of karma (action and reaction) and attain transcendental knowledge of the self and the Supreme.

Therefore, without being attached to the fruits of activities, one should act as a matter of duty; for by working without attachment, one attains the Supreme. 

Confusion

My intelligence is bewildered by Your equivocal instructions. Therefore, please tell me decisively what is most beneficial for me. 


Laziness

Perform your prescribed duty, for action is better than inaction. A man cannot even maintain his physical body without work. 
Even kings like Janaka and others attained the perfectional stage by performance of prescribed duties.Therefore,just for the sake of educating the people in general, you should perform your work. 


Lust

The Blessed Lord said: It is lust only, Arjuna, which is born of contact with the material modes of passion and later transformed into wrath, and which is the all-devouring, sinful enemy of this world. 
Therefore, 0 Aijuna, best of the Bharatas, in the very beginning curb this great symbol of sin [lust] by regulating the senses, and slay this destroyer of knowledge and self-realization. 
Thus knowing oneself to be transcendental to material senses, mind and intelligence, one should control the lower self by the higher self and thus­ by spiritual strength-'conquer this insatiable enemy known as lust. 



→ TAKE AWAYS

Nobody is free from action, so actions are to be performed in our line of duty and with spiritual consciousness, thus leading to liberation instead of bondage.


Chapter 4
TRANSCENDENTAL KNOWLEDGE

Since in Chapter Three, Kṛṣṇa has recommended that Arjuna fight in full knowledge of Him, in Chapter Four, He explains different aspects of transcendental knowledge. This 4 first chapters are the ABC of the Gita.

Knowledge transmission

First Kṛṣṇa explains attaining knowledge through the disciplic succession.

The Blessed Lord said: I instructed this imperishable science of yoga to the sun-god, Vivasvan, and Vivasvan instructed it to Manu, the father of mankind, and Manu in turn instructed it to lksvaku. 
This supreme science was thus received through the chain of disciplic succession, and the saintly kings understood it in that way. But in course of time the succession was broken, and therefore the science as it is appears to be lost. 
That very ancient science of the relationship with the Supreme is today told by Me to you because you are My devotee as well as My friend; therefore you can understand the transcendental mystery of this science. 
Successively explains His appearance and then His mission

Although I am unborn and My transcendental body never deteriorates, and although I am the Lord of all sentient beings, I still appear in every millennium in My original transcendental form. 
Whenever and wherever there is a decline in religious practice, 0 descendant of Bharata, and a predominant rise of irreligion-at that time I descend Myself. 
In order to deliver the pious and to annihilate the miscreants, as well as to reestablish the principles of religion, I advent Myself millennium after millennium. 

The Lord explains His devotional service as the goal 

One who knows the transcendental nature of My appearance and activi­ties does not, upon leaving the body, take his birth again in this material world, but attains My eternal abode, 0 Arjuna. 
Being freed from attachment, fear and anger, being fully absorbed in Me and taking refueg in Me, many, many persons in the past became puritied by knowledge of Me-and thus they all attained transcendental love for Me. 
All of them-as they surrender unto Me-l reward accordingly. Everyone follows My path in all respects, 0 son of Prtha. 

Action and Inaction

One who sees inaction in action, and action in inaction, is intelligent among men, and he is ip the transcendental position, although engaged in all sorts of activities. 
Such a man of understanding acts with mind and intelligence perfectly controlled, gives up all sense of proprietorship over his possessions and acts only for the hare necessities of life. Thus working, he is not affected by sinful reactions. 

The necessity of approaching a guru, a realized teacher.

just try to learn the truth by approaching a spiritual master. Inquire from him submissively and render service unto him. The self-realized soul can impart knowledge unto you because he has seen the truth. 

Value of transcendental knowledge
O chastiser of the enemy, the sacrifice of knowledge is greater than the sacrifice of material possessions. 0 son of Prtha, after all, the sacrifice of work culminates in transcendental knowledge. 
In this world, there is nothing so sublime and pure as transcendntal knowledge. Such knowledge is the mature fruit of all mysticism. And one who has achieved this enjoys the self within himself in due course of time. 

Kṛṣṇa glorifies transcendental knowledge and requests Arjuna to arm himself with this knowledge – which burns all sinfull reactions to ashes – and fight!

Therefore the doubts which have arisen in your heart out of ignorance should be slashed by the weapon of knowledge. Armed with yoga, 0 Bharata, stand and fight. 



Bg. 4.10 Fear

Being freed from attachment, fear and anger, being fully absorbed in Me and taking refueg in Me, many, many persons in the past became purified by knowledge of Me-and thus they all attained transcendental love for Me. 



Bg. 4.11 Losing hope

All of them-as they surrender unto Me-l reward accordingly. Everyone follows My path in all respects, 0 son of Prtha. 


Bg. 4.36-37 Feeling sinful

Even if you are considered to be the most sinful of all sinners, when you are situated in the boat of transcendental knowledge, you will be able to cross over the ocean of miseries.
As the blazing fire turns firewood to ashes, 0 Arjuna, so does the fire of knowledge bum to ashes all reactions to material activities.


Bg. 4.39  Seeking peace

A faithful man who is absorbed in transcendental knowledge and who subdues his senses quickly attains the supreme spiritual peace. 



→ TAKE AWAYS
- Approach a spiritual master and get transcendetal knowledge from him to burn all karma and attain the supreme spiritual peace.

Chapter 5
ACTION AND RENUNCIATION 

Chapter 5 is the result of aplying chapters 2,3,4 (peace). ultimo verso mas inportante (29) After Lamenttion

Arjuna opens Chapter Five by asking Kṛṣṇa to definitivelly explain whether the renunciation of work (speculation, ‘sankhya, jnana’, inaction-in-knowledge) or work in devotion is superior.

Arjuna said: O Kṛṣṇa, first of all You ask me to renounce work, and then again You recommend work with devotion. Now will You kindly tell me definitely which of the two is more beneficial? 
Lord Kṛṣṇa explains the concepts of action with detachment and renunciation in actions and how both are a means to the same goal of salvation.

The Blessed Lord said: The renunciation of work and work in devotion are both good for liberation. But, of the two, work in devotional service is better than renunciation of works. 
Kṛṣṇa answers that one who is detached from his work’s results is the one who is truly renounced. Such a person knows that while the body acts, he, the soul, actually does nothing.

One who neither hates nor desires the fruits of his activities is known to be always renounced. Such a person, liberated from all dualities, easily overcomes material bondage and is completely liberated, 0 mighty- armed Arjuna.

Only the ignorant speak of karma-yoga and devotional service as being different from the analytical study of the material world [ sarikhya]. Those who are actually learned say that he who applies himself well to one of these paths achieves the results of both.

One who knows that the position reached by means of renunciation can also be attained by works in devotional service and who therefore sees that the path of works and the path of renunciation are one, sees things as they are.

Arjuna should therefore, do his duty steadily act for the satisfaction of Kṛṣṇa.

One who works in devotion, who is a pure soul, and who controls his mind and senses, is dear to everyone, and everyone is dear to him. Though always working, such a man is never entangled.

 Impartially viewing the external world, he should reside in his body aloof from bodily activities.

A person in the divine consciousness, although engaged in seeing, hear­ing, touching, smelling, eating, moving about, sleeping, and breathing, always knows within himself that he actually does nothing at all. Because while speaking, evacuating, receiving, opening or closing his eyes, he always knows that only the material senses are engaged with their objects and that he is aloof from them. 
One who performs his duty without attachment, s ur rendering the results unto the Supreme God, is not affected by sinful action, as the lotus leaf is untouched by water. 
 By fixing his consciousness on the Supreme and knowing that Kṛṣṇa is the true enjoyer, the goal of sacrifice and austerity, and the Lord of all planets, he, the pure soul, will find true peace beyond this material world.

The sages, knowing Me as the uitimate purpose of all sacrifices and austerities, the Supreme Lord of all planets and demigods and the bene­ factor and well-wisher of all living entities, attain peace from the pangs of material miseries. 

In the first five chapters, Kṛṣṇa has explained ‘buddhi-yoga’, working with consciousness focused on Kṛṣṇa without fruitive desires. The Lord has also explained ‘sankhya’, ‘karma-yoga’,and ‘jnana-yoga’ to obtain liberation and as stepping stones to Kṛṣṇa consciousness. 

Now, at the end of the Fifth Chapter (5. 27-28) and continuing on to the Sixth Chapter (wherein Kṛṣṇa explains practical points for a practicioner), Kṛṣṇa explains ‘dhyana- yoga’ concluding that ‘dhyana’, or meditation upon Kṛṣṇa, is meditation’s final goal.

Outwardly performing all actions but inwardly renouncing their fruits, the wise man, purified by the fire of transcendental knowledge, attains peace, detachment, forbearance, spiritual vision and bliss.

Anger
The Blessed Lord said: Fearlessness, purification of one's existence, cultivation of spiritual knowledge, charity, self-control, performance of sacrifice, study of the Vedas, austerity and simplicity; nonviolence, truth­ fulness, freedom from anger; renunciation, tranquility, aversion to fault­ finding, compassion and freedom from covetousns; gentleness, modesty and steady determination; vigor, forgiveness, fortitude, cleanliness, free­ dom from envy and the passion for honor-these transcendental quali­ ties, 0 son of Bharata, belong to godly men endowed with divine nature. 



Renounciation and devotional action

The sage

Liberation

 



→ TAKE AWAYS


Chapter 6
YOGA PRACTICE


Chapter 6: Your Thinking - best way of thinking? Anything to do with the mind. Last verse is the conclusion.

Lord Kṛṣṇa talks about 'astanga yoga,' and how to practice it so one may gain mastery of the mind reveal their spiritual nature.


##Sañkhya- yoga


Yoga and Yogic Practice

# Kṛṣṇa begins the Sixth Chapter by explaining that the neophyte yogi engages in fruitive sitting postures while the advanced yogi, the true ‘sannyasi’, works without attachment. Such a yogi liberates, not degrades, himself by his mind’s activities. Carefully controlling his mind and engaging it body, and his self in Kṛṣṇa’s service, the yogi strictly practices ‘dhyana- yoga’ in a secluded place. Fixing his mind on the self and on Kṛṣṇa, he attains transcendental happiness in the kingdom of God. Arjuna then points out the main difficulty in practicing yoga is controlling the mind. Kṛṣṇa responds by saying that one can overcome the obstinate mind through constant practice and determination. In responding to Arjuna’s about the fate of an unsuccessful yogi, Kṛṣṇa answers that one unsuccessful in his practice will still take birth in a family of wise transcendentalists and automatically become attract yogic principles. Kṛṣṇa finally states in the last two verses of the chapter that the yogi is greater than the ascetic, the jnani and the karmi. And the greatest of all yogis is he who always thinks of Kṛṣṇa and with grest faith worships Him in loving service.
Astanga-yoga, a mechanical meditative practice, controls the mind and the senses and focuses concentration on Paramatma (the Supersoul, the form of the Lord situated in the heart). This practice culminates in samadhi, full consciousness of the Supreme.

Bg. 6.5  Uncontrolled mind

A man must elevate himself by his own mind, not degrade himself. The mind is the friend of the conditioned soul, and his enemy as well.

Bg. 6.6  Uncontrolled mind

For him who has conquered the mind, the mind is the best of friends; but for one who has failed to do so, his very mind will be the gratest enemy. 

Bg. 6.16 Laziness

There is no possibility of one's becoming a yogi, 0 Arjuna, if one eats too much, or eats too little, sleeps too much or does not sleep enough. 


Bg. 6.26  Uncontrolled mind

From whatever and wherever the mind wanders due to its flickering and unsteady nature, one must certainly withdraw it and bring it back under the control of the Self. 


Bg. 6.30 Loneliness

For one who sees Me everywhere and sees everything in Me, I am never lost, nor is he ever lost to Me. 


Bg. 6.32 Discriminated

He is a perfect yogi who, by comparison to his own self, sees the true equality of all beings, both in their happiness and distress, 0 Arjuna! 


Bg. 6.35  Uncontrolled mind

The Blessed Lord said: 0 mighty-armed son of Kunti, it is undoubtedly very difficult to curb the restless mind, but it is possible by constant practice and by detachment. 





→ TAKE AWAYS

SECTION 2
SECTION 2 

All About Kṛṣṇa

(Where do I come from) What is the source of my existence.






Chapter 7
THE SUPREME TRUTH 

Lord Kṛṣṇa tells us about the absolute reality, why it is difficult to overcome Maya and the four types of people that are attracted to and opposed to divinity.

## The Knowledge of the Absolute

Energies and powers of the Lord
abandonment to Kṛṣṇa
worship of devas
Intelligence and absence of.

Chapter 7: Absolute means Kṛṣṇa and his energies. THE BOSS - Reasons why Kṛṣṇa is the boss: Owner of everything... manager of everything - he enjoys everything . Job interview - decides your future. Kṛṣṇa interviews you. The boss introduces himself. verso 30 



# Knowing Kṛṣṇa’s instruction at the end of Chapter Six, one should initiate his practice of yoga from the point of concentrating of the mind upon Kṛṣṇa. Chapter Seven thus opens with Kṛṣṇa explaining knowledge of Himself and His opulent energies. Thus Arjuna can fully worship Kṛṣṇa, as described at the end of Chapter Six, and think of Him with devotion as he fights.
Kṛṣṇa first explains that as He is the Supreme Truth, everything in existence is a combination of His material and spiritual energies. He is the active principle within all and is all- pervasive through His diverse material and spiritual energies. Because the world’s activities are conducted by the three modes of nature which emanate from Him, (Although Kṛṣṇa is independent and above them) only those who surrender to Kṛṣṇa can cross beyond these modes to know Him. Four kinds of impious souls never surrender to Kṛṣṇa while four kinds of pious souls do surrender. Kṛṣṇa also covers Himself from the impersonalists, who are less intelligent, and from those who surrender to the demigods. But those who are truly pious, the undeluded, serve Kṛṣṇa as the governor of the material manifestation, the demigods, and sacrifice, can know and understand Kṛṣṇa – ev the time of death.

Lord Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Truth, the supreme cause and sustaining force of everything, both material and spiritual. Advanced souls surrender unto Him in devotion, whereas impious souls divert their minds to other objects of worship.

Bg. 7.14  Temptation

This divine energy of Mine, consisting of the three modes of material nature, is difficult to overcome. But those who have surrendered unto Me can easily cross beyond it. 




→ TAKE AWAYS


Chapter 8
SPIRITUAL LIFE IN ACTION
LIBERATION

Reaching the Absolute


Lord Kṛṣṇa explains the various ways of renouncing the material world, the destination to which each leads to and the rewards they receive.

## Reaching the Absolute

the Absolute, the distinct being, the nature and the act

meditation on the Lord and the after-death
material and spiritual worlds
the hour of death

Chapter 8: Eternal Spiritual Life insurance - Kṛṣṇa wants to convince us to work for him. What I am going to get in return- Kṛṣṇa teaches us what am going to get. Kṛṣṇa gives an offer that no one can compete with. When retire they give you a pen certificate. Kṛṣṇa giveds you something that no boss gives you: eternal life insurance. You get all results of tapasya, learning, etc. texto 28 es el resumen.


# Chapter Eight begins by Arjuna asking Kṛṣṇa about Brahmam, karma, the demigods, the material world, and knowing Kṛṣṇa at the time of death. Kṛṣṇa first briefly answers Arjuna’s first five questions and then begins explaining in detail how to know Kṛṣṇa at the time of death. Since one attains what one remembers at the time of death, if one remembers Kṛṣṇa, one goes to Him. Kṛṣṇa then explains how He can be constantly thought of as the transcendental person who knows everything, the oldest controller, the smallest, the maintainer. Thus by pract yoga and remembering Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa explains, one will go to the eternal spiritual world and never again to return to this temporary, miserable material world. Then, after describing the different yogic ways in which one may leave this world, Kṛṣṇa advises Arjuna not worry about other paths – either Vedic study, yoga, austere sacrifices, charity, jnana, or karma – for the results of these will all be obtained through performing devotional service. And in the end, such a yogi in devotion, reaches the supreme eternal abode.
By remembering Lord Kṛṣṇa in devotion throughout one's life, and especially at the time of death, one can attain to His supreme abode, beyond the material world.

Bg. 8.28  Seeking peace

A person who accepts the path of devotional service is not bereft of the results derived from studying the Vedas, performing austere sacrifices, giving charity or pursuing philosophical and fruitive activities. At the end he reaches the supreme abode. 








→ TAKE AWAYS


Chapter 9
CONFIDENTIAL KNOWLEDGE 

Chapter 9: KṚṢṆA'S PASSWORD = bhakti - confidential knowledge, more confidential and the most confidential. Kṛṣṇa gives us his `password for everything. Is like our boss gives us his atm passoword. Bhakti is what opens Kṛṣṇa world. text 26 offer me a leaf, etc.


Lord Kṛṣṇa talks us how the our material existence is created, prevaded, maintained and destroyed by divine powers, the sovereign science and secret.


## The most secret of knowledge

Kṛṣṇa, Origin and ultimate rest of everything
Fools and wise

manifestations of the Supreme Lord

sacrifices and worship
the bhakta

# After Kṛṣṇa answered Arjuna’s questions in Chapter Eight, He continues speaking, in Chapter Nine, the knowledge about Himself that He had begun explaining in Chapter Seven. Kṛṣṇa thus prefaces Chapter Nine by stating that the knowledge He’ll now reveal is most confidential, for it is about His actual position, which only the non-envious and faithful can understand. Kṛṣṇa continues explaining that although independent and aloof, He pervades, creates and anihilates the entire cosmos through His material energy. Those mahatmas who know Kṛṣṇa as the Supreme Personality of Godhead take shelter of Him and serve Him as the only enjoyer and the supreme object of worship.
Kṛṣṇa then explains the fortunate position of such devotees: If one worships Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa cares, compensates for his deficiencies, and preserves his strengths. And all Kṛṣṇa asks for is an offering of a leaf, a flower, or some water – if it is offered with devotion. Thus His devotee comes to Him. Even if a devotee unintentionally commits a horrendous act, he will be rectified, for Kṛṣṇa promises that His devotee will never perish.
In Chapters Seven and Nine, Kṛṣṇa has explained knowledge of His energies. 

Lord Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Godhead and the supreme object of worship. The soul is eternally related to Him through transcendental devotional service (bhakti). By reviving one's pure devotion one returns to Kṛṣṇa in the spiritual realm.


Bg. 9.22 Losing hope



Bg. 9.29 Discriminated & Loneliness



Bg. 9.30 Feeling sinful



Bg. 9.34 Losing hope






→ TAKE AWAYS


Chapter 10
THE OPULENCE OF THE ABSOLUTE 


Chapter 10: Bhaktas-  3 thirds of catu sloki is about devotees. Ways of thinking of Kṛṣṇa Main opulence of the lord are in texts 8-11. The opulence of the Absulte is his devotees, the mosr confidential aspect.

Lord Kṛṣṇa reveals his manifestations as Arjuna prays to him to describe more of his 'opulences' and Kṛṣṇa explains the most prominent ones.

## Glories of the Absolute

Kṛṣṇa, Original Source and Repos of everything 
knowledge and devotion
Fools and sages
Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme

manifestations of the Supreme Lord

# In Chapter Ten, Kṛṣṇa explains His opulences more specifically and thereby reveals Himself the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the source of all. Kṛṣṇa also tells how His pure devotees know that He is the unborn Supreme Lord, the source of all sages, the source of the material and spiritual worlds, and the source of all qualities and attitudes. Thus pure and wise devotees worship Kṛṣṇa, converse about Him, and with thoughts dwelling in Him, undeluded and free from sin, engage in His service. Out of compassion, Kṛṣṇa within their hearts destroys any remaining ignorance.
After hearing of Kṛṣṇa’s opulences, Arjuna confirms Kṛṣṇa as the Supreme Lord by quoting authorities and explains that only Kṛṣṇa can truly know Himself. Kṛṣṇa then tells of His divine manifestations within this world – as the Supersoul, the ocean, the Himalayas – which merely indicate His limitless opulences, for a single fragment of Kṛṣṇa’s energy pervades and supports this entire universe!
Arjuna, although acknowledging that Kṛṣṇa in the two-armed form that he now sees before him is Supreme, still requests Kṛṣṇa to reveal that all-pervading Universal Form that supports the Universe. 
All wondrous phenomena showing power, beauty, grandeur or sublimity, either in the material world or in the spiritual, are but partial manifestations of Kṛṣṇa's divine energies and opulence. As the supreme cause of all causes and the support and essence of everything, Kṛṣṇa is the supreme object of worship for all beings.


Bg. 10.3 Feeling sinful

He who knows Me as the unborn, as the beginningless, as the Supreme Lord of all the worlds-he, undeluded among men, is freed from all sins. 



→ TAKE AWAYS


Chapter 11
THE UNIVERSAL FORM 


Chapter 11: Kṛṣṇa's 3 forms  Universal form, he is everywhere. Boss form is 4 armed form. I want to be your friend: Kṛṣṇas wants to be our friend. 11.55 is described the most confidential form is Govinda.


Lord Kṛṣṇa grants Arjuna's wish and reveal His universal form 

## The universal form

the cosmic form of Supreme Lord
tribute of Arjuna to the Lord
the original form of the Supreme Lord


Bg. 11.33 Demotivated

Therefore get up and prepare to fight. After conquering your enemies you will enjoy a flourishing kingdom. They are already put to death by My arrangement, and you, 0 Savyasacin, can be but an instrument in the fight. 


Bg. 11.44 Practicing Forgiveness

You are the Supreme Lord, to he worshiped by every living being. Thus I fall down to offer You my respects and ask Your mercy. Please tolerate the wrongs that I may have done to You and hear with me as a father with his son, or a friend with his friend, or a lover with his beloved. 



Bg. 11.50 Fear

Sañjaya said to Dhrtarashtra: The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, while speaking thus to Arjuna, displayed His real four-armed form, and at last He showed him His two-armed form, thus encouraging the fearful Arjuna. 


Lord Kṛṣṇa grants Arjuna divine vision and reveals His spectacular unlimited form as the cosmic universe. Thus He conclusively establishes His divinity. Kṛṣṇa explains that His own all-beautiful humanlike form is the original form of Godhead. One can perceive this form only by pure devotional service.


# Thus, in Chapter Eleven, Kṛṣṇa proves Himself as the Supreme Lord and He establishes the criteria that anyone who claims to be God must also show a Universal Form. Kṛṣṇa then reveals to Arjuna His wondrous effulgent, all-expansive form, and Arjuna sees all soldiers on both sides dying within it. Kṛṣṇa explains His form as time, the destroyer of all world, and requests that Arjuna, knowing in advance the inevitable d of all the warriors, become His instrument. In answer to Arjuna’s fearful prayers, Kṛṣṇa first shows His four-armed form before again returning to His original two-armed form. Kṛṣṇa then states that his two-armed form can only be seen by pure devotees, and such pure devotees, working for Kṛṣṇa, free from desiring fruitive activities, and who make Kṛṣṇa the su goal of their lives, certainly come to Him.


 His confusion was so strong that his bow and arrows fell from his hand, and he could not perceive anything clearly. He was so afraid that he begged pardon for his dealings with Kṛṣṇa as an intimate friend. As a friend, Arjuna often behaved unceremoniously with the Lord, and upon seeing the awesome universal form, Arjuna said:

"I have in the past addressed You as 'O Kṛṣṇa,' 'O Yadava,' 'O my friend,' without knowing Your glories. Please forgive whatever I may have done in madness or in love. I have dishonored You many times while relaxing or while lying on the same bed or eating together, sometimes alone and sometimes in front of many friends. Please excuse me for all my offenses." (Bg. 11.41-42)

Arjuna inquired from Kṛṣṇa in His universal form, “Who are You?” the Lord presented Himself as kala, death personified to kill. By nature’s law, when there is an unwanted increase in population, kala appears, and by some arrangement of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, people are killed wholesale in different ways, by war, pestilence, famine and so on. 

Although Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the greatest among all greats, still He remained with those royal brothers, being attracted by their devotion, by their friendship and by their love. That is the proof of how great this process of devotional service is. It can attract even the Supreme Personality of Godhead. God is great, but devotional service is greater than God because it attracts Him. People who are not in devotional service can never understand what great value there is in rendering service to the Lord.

Arjuna requested that Kṛṣṇa to show His universal form, because he knew that "I am accepting Kṛṣṇa as the Supreme, but there are many persons with poor fund of knowledge, they may not accept." Therefore he requested Kṛṣṇa to show him the universal form.

The philosophical take away is that the universal form of God, is everything within the universe, but Kṛṣṇa is even more than that whole complete universal form. He is the origin of that universal form.

Arjuna understood that although Kṛṣṇa was his friend, He was the Supreme Personality of Godhead and therefore the proper person to be his guru. He therefore told Kṛṣṇa at the beginning of Bhagavad-gita (2.7), sisyas te ’ham sadhi mam tvam prapannam: “Now I am Your disciple and a soul surrendered unto You. Please instruct me.”
—
Camasa Muni, one of the nine sages who came to instruct King Nimi, addressed the King and said, "The four social orders, namely the brahmanas, the ksatriyas, the vaisyas, and the sudras, have come out of the different parts of the universal form of the Supreme Lord as follows: the brahmanas have come out from the head, the ksatriyas have come out from the arms, the vaisyas have come out from the waist, and the sudras have come out from the legs. Similarly, the sannyasis have come out from the head, the vanaprasthas from the arms, the grhasthas from the waist, and the brahmacaris from the legs."
___
O learned brahmana, it was formerly explained that all the planets of the universe with their respective governors are situated in the different parts of the gigantic body of the virat-purusa. I have also heard that the different planetary systems are supposed to be in the gigantic body of the virat-purusa. But what is their actual position ? Will you please explain that?
—

—
Nondevotees think that because Kṛṣṇa says, “I am God,” they and everyone else can say the same. But if asked to show their universal form, they cannot do it. That is the difference between a pseudo god and the real God. 
——
Universal Form of the Lord which includes all diversities of matter beginning from Brahma to the ant, is but one-fourth portion of the inconceivable mystic powers of the Lord.
—
The gigantic universal form of the Lord called adhidaivatam is contemplated by the neophyte who cannot approach the Supreme Lord in His manifestation as Supersoul.
—


Prabhupada: Kṛṣṇa is... Kṛṣṇa is bigger than the universal form. Kṛṣṇa assumed the universal form, not that universal form made Kṛṣṇa.

Hari-sauri: Whatever is there in the universal form is found in small quantity in the bodies that the living entities get.

Prabhupada: They are small universe. There is word, cha ache brahmande, ta ache i bandhe.(?) The arrangement what is there, universally, the same as in the smallest entity (indistinct).

—

Indian man: Somebody put a question to Bhagavan Rajneesh that "you claim that you are God. Can you show us your universal form?" He said, "Well, I can show you. First you come like an Arjuna. First you become Arjuna. Then I can show you a universal form."

Prabhupada: So he admits that much.

Aksayananda: That he cannot.

Indian man: No, he admits that he can, but he has put...

Prabhupada: "So that's all right. Have you shown anyone your universal form amongst so many, your disciples? Have you shown?" The next question should be like that.

Indian man: He never asked. I was hearing tape in one life member's house.

Prabhupada: No, no, no, if... You learn that, "Have you shown ever your universal form to any one of your disciples?"

Indian man: There was not such intelligent person to ask this.

Prabhupada: That is the... Say.

Indian man: So we have to ask that. (laughter)

Prabhupada: If he says, "No, none of my students are efficient," "Then why you are preaching? If you cannot make any one of your students as efficient, then why you are preaching, wasting your time?" No, no, these rascal, they, their face should not be seen even. They are so fallen.

__

Therefore God is unlimited. God is not limited to become gigantic universal form, but He is also able to enter within the atom

—

Arjuna enquired, "Who are You, Sir?" Because he was dealing with Kṛṣṇa as friend, but after seeing the virad-rupa, the gigantic universal form, so he enquired, "Who are You, Sir?" He replied, kalo 'smi: "I am kala, kala. I have appeared to take away all these sinful demons." 

—

Giriraja: (reads synonyms for Bg. 11.13) "Translation: At that time Arjuna could see in the universal form of the Lord the unlimited expansions of the universe situated in one place although divided into many, many thousands."

Prabhupada: Yes. So, although... Now, what is important? The many, many thousands universes divided into varieties of opulences, that is important or Kṛṣṇa important?

Dr. Patel: Kṛṣṇa is important.

__

Bhagavata: Even though Kṛṣṇa showed His universal form, Duryodhana still did not agree.

Prabhupada: No, Duryodhana also agreed. All of them got salvation. That is mentioned. Anyone who was in the Battle of Kuruksetra, all of them got salvation. By their being killed in the battle, they all got liberation and salvation. That is stated by Bhismadeva. 
—
And if you want to serve Kṛṣṇa in His gigantic form, universal form, you do not know where to catch Him. That is not possible. Kṛṣṇa showed His gigantic form to Arjuna and he was terrified: "Please again become in your original Kṛṣṇa form." Even Arjuna who is always constant companion of Kṛṣṇa, friend, he was also terrified by His gigantic universal form.

—

He is greater than the greatest and still, He can become smaller than the smallest. That is his greatness. He can become... He can show Arjuna the virad-rupa, the universal form; at the same time, He can talk with Arjuna as ordinary friend. This is Kṛṣṇa. You have read Bhagavad-gita. He was talking on the chariot as his friend, but when there was need, He... Arjuna wanted to see the universal friend, and Kṛṣṇa showed him that universal form, gigantic form, everything including.


—

"Who are you?" Kala. The virad-rupa, the universal form seeing, Arjuna said, "Who are You, Sir?" So He said that "I am in the kala-rupa, in the form of time, now. I have come to kill the all, all of you." So therefore our business should be that this life should be utilized only for complete Kṛṣṇa consciousness. No other business.


—


That is another thing. Because he has shown, by pushing the eyes, a light. That's all... We have to see that how much degraded the persons are. They have no even brain. What are the evidence, that he showed some light, and what else?

Hamsaduta: Some music.

Prabhupada: Some music.

Hamsaduta: They hear some music.

Prabhupada: Just see. That is the evidence of God. Where is in the sastra that by pushing eyes, Kṛṣṇa showed some light, and somebody...? He never did with Arjuna like that. He showed His gigantic universal form. But He never showed some light.

—

Arjuna was a devotee, so He showed him. That is not actual form. Just like a person, he, he may dress himself as a king or something, but that is not his real appearance, his appearance at home. So Kṛṣṇa's real form is Vrndavana, at home. That is real form. And all other forms are expansion of His plenary portions.

—

alati: What class of impersonalists are worshiping the universal form?

Prabhupada: Well, universal form is not impersonal. That is personal. That is also manifestation of Kṛṣṇa.

__

So chanting, dancing, and taking prasadam are universal formula, and we have experienced everywhere in the world.

—

a gross conception of the Personality of Godhead in His universal form for the beginners is recommended. By such a gross conception of God through the material manifestations of His energy, one is enabled to spiritualize the mind and the senses and gradually concentrate the mind upon Lord Visnu, the Supreme, who is present as the Supersoul in every heart and everywhere, in every atom of the material universe. 

—

If we want to worship His gigantic universal form, we cannot approach Him. It is not possible. But He's so kind. He comes just suitable for our, for our being handled by us.

—

etad rupam bhagavato
hy arupasya cid-atmanah
maya-gunair viracitam
mahadadibhir atmani
[SB 1.3.30]

"The conception of the virat, universal form of the Lord, as appearing in the material world, is imaginary. It is to enable the less intelligent and neophytes to adjust to the idea of the Lord's having form. But factually the Lord has no material form."

—

Guest (1): The universal form should come to the best. That is the point.

Prabhupada: Don't talk of universal form. First of all talk of your form. Try to understand your form. Then go universal.
—

But the atheist will say, "These people are foolish. They have taken a brass idol, and they are engaged." That is false. Actually, we are engaged in Kṛṣṇa's service. We are dressing Kṛṣṇa directly. We are offering flower, Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa has kindly accepted the arca-murti incarnation to be handled by me. Otherwise just like Arjuna saw the virata-murti, the universal form of Kṛṣṇa. He was tremble; he was afraid. He requested Kṛṣṇa, "Please become again just like my friend. This is very fearful." Yes.

—

Revatinandana: In the First Chapter, God Realization booklet, First Chapter, Second Canto of Srimad-Bhagavatam, the process described there where it says that the gross materialists can begin meditating on the syllable om and then try to contemplate the universal form. That is not recommended for this age, right?

Prabhupada: No, that is not for the advanced stage. Those who cannot... Just like the materialistic persons, they cannot understand why we are worshiping Deity. They are puzzled. They think, "Why these fools are taking one brass doll and worshiping as God?" They laugh. You see? They cannot understand. They are hard... What is called? It is impossible for them. Therefore they have been recommended that "You think of God, the universal form." That they like, their meditation, that universal form. They cannot understand or concentrate on this form, Kṛṣṇas tu bhagavan svayam [SB 1.3.28], dvi-bhuja-muralidhara, Syamasundara form. They cannot. But by this arca process we are giving chance to everyone. But for the materialistic person it is difficult. They think that they are idol worshipers. But actually, the Vaisnavas, they are not so fools that they will worship an idol. Therefore they have been recommended to concentrate on the universal form.

—

If you want to dress the Supreme Lord, if you take His virad-rupa, universal form, where is your cloth and how you can dress? Eh? You haven't got so much cloth. In spite of having so many mills, you cannot dress the virat form. Therefore Kṛṣṇa, by His omnipotency, He becomes a smaller just to be handled by you. That is His mercy.

—
How is it that devotees of Kṛṣṇa like demigods can be fearful even if they see Visvarupa?

Prabhupada: Because they cannot love Visvarupa. Is that all right? Can you love Visvarupa? If Kṛṣṇa comes before you with Visvarupa, (laughs) you'll forget your love. Don't try to love Visvarupa. Love Syamasundara, that's all. We have seen Kṛṣṇa in Visvarupa during wartime.

—

In the first chapter the glories of chanting are described and the process of meditation on the universal form of the Lord by the neophyte devotees is hinted. 

—
He has no material hand. That is the version of Vedas. But He has hand. That you cannot measure. Just like Arjuna could not measure when He showed the universal form. So avajananti mam mudha manusim... [Bg. 9.11]. Therefore Kṛṣṇa says, "Because I am moving amongst them as ordinary human being, they are thinking of Me as one of them."
—

So in the Bhagavad-gita you'll also find that when Arjuna saw the universal form of Kṛṣṇa, he asked that "Who are You?" And Kṛṣṇa said in that universal form that "I am Kala. I have come to kill." That's it. This was the answer.


—

They analyze that the intelligent class of men, they are born of the mouth of the universal form of God. The administrative class of men, they are born out of the arms of the universal form of God. The mercantile class of men, they are born out of the abdomen of the universal form of God. And the laborer class of men, they are born out of the legs of the universal form of God. Now, so far the body is concerned, either the mouth or head or the legs, no part of the body is less important, because every part of the body is required for proper function of the body. But by comparative study, the head is most important than all other parts of the body. If head is cut off from the body, then body becomes immediately dead. But if your hand is cut off from the body, the body still remains alive. It is not dead. So the intelligent class of men who form the head of the society, if they are lacking, if there is no intelligent class of men, then it is to be considered that sort of human society is dead, because the head is not there.
—
In His universal form the sun is considered to be one of the eyes of the Lord, and the moon is also another eye. Take it figuratively or universal form of the Lord, but you cannot escape the seeing power of Govinda. He is seeing always. There are so many witnesses according to Vedic literature. So we cannot do anything hiding from the eyes of the Lord. He is seeing. He is witness. And that is stated in the Bhagavad-gita: upadrasta anumanta. Upadrasta. Upadrasta means overseer. Overseer.

__
So this is the universal form of spiritualism, the chanting of Hare Kṛṣṇa.

—Supersoul... He is acting as the Supersoul. And He is the universal form. When you think of universal form of the Lord, that is the manifestation of this Ksirodakasayi Visnu. And that Ksirodakasayi Visnu as Paramatma, Supersoul, is situated in everyone's heart, even within the atom also.

—
Arjuna requested, "O Kṛṣṇa, that will You kindly show me Your universal form?" So Kṛṣṇa showed him, "Yes." So that... This was Arjuna's teaching to world that in future so many fools will represent himself as God. So don't be befooled by them. Just ask him, "Show me your universal form." Then accept him as God. Don't very cheaply accept any fool as God.
—
following in the footsteps of Arjuna, we should request to see the universal form before accepting anyone as God. Only a fool would accept another fool as God.
—
The universal form is called the virat-rupa because the Supreme Lord is within it in His plenary portion.

—Therefore spirit and matter, which combine together to manifest this gigantic universal form, are originally two energies of the Lord, and consequently the Lord is the original cause of everything.
—
The mouth of the gigantic universal form of the Lord is the source of the speaking power.
—
Although He plays just like an ordinary human being, when there is need He shows His nature as God. To give another example, Kṛṣṇa acted as the chariot driver of Arjuna, but when Arjuna wanted to see Kṛṣṇa’s universal form, Kṛṣṇa immediately showed him a cosmic form with thousands and millions of heads, legs, arms, and weapons. This is Kṛṣṇa
—
Kṛṣṇa's showing the universal form of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, even when lying down on the lap of His mother, proves that the Supreme Personality of Godhead is always the Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
—
The gigantic universal form of the Supreme Lord is the first incarnation and plenary portion of the Supersoul.
—
Loving devotional service can only be rendered to the personal form of Kṛṣṇa, Syamasundara. The impersonalists emphasize the virat-rupa, the universal form exhibited in the Eleventh Chapter of Bhagavad-gita, but it is stated therein (11.21) that the demigods are very much afraid of this form, and Arjuna says,

adrsta-purvam hrsito ’smi drstva
bhayena ca pravyathitam mano me
tad eva me darsaya deva rupam
prasida devesa jagan-nivasa

“After seeing this universal form, which I have never seen before, I am gladdened, but at the same time my mind is disturbed with fear. Therefore please bestow Your grace upon me and reveal again Your form as the Personality of Godhead [Kṛṣṇa, or Syamasundara], O Lord of lords, O abode of the universe.” (Bg. 11.45) There is no question of loving the virat-rupa. If Kṛṣṇa comes before you in the virat-rupa form, you will be so filled with fear that you will forget your love. So don’t be eager like the impersonalists to see the virat-rupa form; just render loving service to Syamasundara, Kṛṣṇa.
—

O Narada, the evacuating outlet of the universal form of the Lord is the abode of the controlling deity of death, Mitra, and the evacuating hole and the rectum of the Lord is the place of envy, misfortune, death, hell, etc.—
—
The process of meditation recommended in the Srimad-Bhagavatam is not to fix one's attention on something impersonal or void. The meditation should concentrate on the person of the Supreme Godhead, either in His virat-rupa, the gigantic universal form, or in His sac-cid-ananda-vigraha [Bs. 5.1], as described in the scriptures. There are authorized descriptions of Visnu forms, and there are authorized representations of Deities in the temples. Thus one can practice meditating upon the Deity, concentrating his mind on the lotus feet of the Lord and gradually rising higher and higher, up to His smiling face.
—

If someone holds a handful of dust, there is no possibility of the dust falling, but if one throws it in the air, it will fall down. Similarly, these planets, which are floating in air, are actually held in the fist of the universal form of the Supreme Lord. By His strength and energy, all moving and unmoving things stay in their place. It is said that because of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the sun is shining and the planets are steadily moving. Were it not for Him, all the planets would scatter, like dust in air, and perish. Similarly, it is due to the Supreme Personality of Godhead that the moon nourishes all vegetables.
—
brahmanas are born from the mouth of the universal form of Visnu, the ksatriyas are born from His arms, the vaisyas from His abdomen or waist, and the sudras from His legs. 
—

Others, who are engaged in the cultivation of knowledge, worship the Supreme Lord as the one without a second, diverse in many, and in the universal form.
—
Since Kṛṣṇa is both matter and spirit, the gigantic universal form comprising all material manifestations is also Kṛṣṇa, and His pastimes in Vrndavana as two-handed Syamasundara, playing on a flute, are those of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
—
After creating the total material energy, the mahat-tattva, and thereby manifesting the gigantic universal form with senses and sense organs, the Supreme Lord entered within it.
—
Thereafter, Bali Maharaja, who was occupying the seat of King Indra, could see the lower planetary systems, such as Rasatala, on the soles of the feet of the Lord’s universal form. He saw on the Lord’s feet the surface of the globe, on the surface of His calves all the mountains, on His knees the various birds, and on His thighs the varieties of air.
—
 Those who worship the virat-purusa, the universal form of the Lord, conceive of this entire rotating system of planets as an animal known as sisumara. This imaginary sisumara is another form of the Lord. The head of the sisumara form is downward, and its body appears like that of a coiled snake. On the end of its tail is Dhruvaloka, on the body of the tail are Prajapati, Agni, Indra and Dharma, and on the root of the tail are Dhata and Vidhata. On its waist are the seven great sages. The entire body of the sisumara faces toward its right and appears like a coil of stars. On the right side of this coil are the fourteen prominent stars from Abhijit to Punarvasu, and on the left side are the fourteen prominent stars from Pusya to Uttarasadha. The stars known as Punarvasu and Pusya are on the right and left hips of the sisumara, and the stars known as Ardra and Aslesa are on the right and left feet of the sisumara. Other stars are also fixed on different sides of the Sisumara planetary system according to the calculations of Vedic astronomers. To concentrate their minds, yogis worship the Sisumara planetary system, which is technically known as the kundalini-cakra.
—
By His inconceivable potency the Lord can become the universal form, as explained in Bhagavad-gita, and at the same time He can remain within the box of His devotees as their worshipable Deity.
—
In the First Chapter the first step in devotional service for God consciousness by the process of hearing and chanting has been stressed, and a gross conception of the Personality of Godhead in His universal form for the beginners is recommended.
—
The gigantic universal form of the Personality of Godhead, within the body of the universal shell  is covered by sevenfold material elements,—

—
The universal form of the Lord and the formless Brahman effulgence of the Lord, being invisible, are inferior features. The concept of the universal form is material, and the concept of impersonal Brahman is spiritual, but the highest spiritual understanding is the Personality of Godhead.
—
The conception of the universal form of the Lord gives a chance to the materialist to think of the Supreme Lord, but the materialist must know for certain that his visualization of the world in a spirit of lording over it is not God realization.
—
if anyone wants to realize the Supreme Truth by conceiving of the universal form of the Lord, he must cultivate the service attitude.
—
for our understanding Arjuna requested the Lord to manifest His universal form, thus testing whether He was actually the Supreme Lord
—

The conception of the virat universal form of the Lord, as appearing in the material world, is imaginary. It is to enable the less intelligent [and neophytes] to adjust to the idea of the Lord's having form. But factually the Lord has no material form.
—
O King, when all the demons, the followers of Maharaja Bali, saw the universal form of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who held everything within His body, when they saw in the Lord’s hand His disc, known as the Sudarsana cakra, which generates intolerable heat, and when they heard the tumultuous sound of His bow, all of these caused lamentation within their hearts.
—

Mayavadi philosophers think the universal form of the Lord to be real and His personal form illusory. We can understand their mistake by a simple example. A fire consists of three elements: heat and light, which are the energy of the fire, and the fire itself. Anyone can understand that the original fire is the reality and that the heat and light are simply the fire’s energy. Heat and light are the formless energies of fire, and in that sense they are unreal. Only the fire has form, and therefore it is the real form of the heat and light. As Kṛṣṇa states in Bhagavad-gita (9.4), maya tatam idam sarvam jagad avyakta-murtina: “By Me, in My unmanifested form. this entire universe is pervaded.” Thus the impersonal conception of the Lord is like the expansion of heat and light from a fire.
—
Jnanis concentrate on the virat-rupa, the gigantic universal form of the Lord. This is a good system in the beginning for those who are extremely materialistic, but there is no need to think continuously of the virat-rupa. When Arjuna was shown the virat-rupa of Kṛṣṇa, he saw it, but he did not want to see it perpetually. He therefore requested the Lord to return to His original form as two-armed Kṛṣṇa.
—
the Lord is not a part of the material creation. The Lord exists in His original, spiritual position. The universal form of the Lord, vairaja-murti, is another feature of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
—

In this regard, Sukadeva Gosvami has recommended that the beginners worship the virata purusa, the gigantic universal form of the Lord. One who cannot believe that the Lord can be worshiped with equal success in the Deity or arca form, or who cannot concentrate on this form, is advised to worship the universal form of the Lord.
—
The word kalpayanti, or "imagine," is significant. The virat universal form of the Absolute is an imagination of the speculative philosophers who are unable to adjust to the eternal two-handed form of Lord Sri Kṛṣṇa. Although the universal form, as imagined by the great philosophers, is one of the features of the Lord, it is more or less imaginary.
—



→ TAKE AWAYS



Chapter 12
THE PATH OF DEVOTION 

In this Chapter, Lord Kṛṣṇa extols the glory of true devotion to God and explains the different forms of spiritual disciplines.


Chapter 12: The Dearest and Best Worker: Kṛṣṇa gives us the contract. Last 4 verses tell us how we can become dear, very dear, or dearest worker to Kṛṣṇa. We accept the job. (asita devala, etc). Nice boss: if you cannot do this do that, etc.


## Devotional service

personalism and impersonalism
ways to the Supreme Lord
the loved one to the Lord

Bhakti-yoga, pure devotional service to Lord Kṛṣṇa, is the highest and most expedient means for attaining pure love for Kṛṣṇa, which is the highest end of spiritual existence. Those who follow this supreme path develop divine qualities.


# In Chapter Twelve, Arjuna, after witnessing Kṛṣṇa’s awesome Universal Form, wishes to clarify his own position as a devotee, the highest worshiper of the Supreme. He thus asks whether worshiping Kṛṣṇa through devotional service or worshiping the impersonal is superior. Kṛṣṇa immediatly responds saying that one engaged in His personal service is the topmost. One should therefore engage in Kṛṣṇa’s service and fix his mind solely upon Kṛṣṇa, and, if that cannot be done, one should follow the rules and regulations of ‘bhakti-yoga’, which purify one so he is later able to do so. Kṛṣṇa then describes other processes that eventually lead to His pure devotional service.
Then qualities that endear a devotee to Kṛṣṇa, which Kṛṣṇa next mentions, such as equality in both happiness and distress, independence from the ordinary course of activities, satisfaction, and the faithful following of the path of devotional service, are also part of the process of worshiping Kṛṣṇa in devotional service.


Practicing Forgiveness
One who is not envious but who is a kind friend to all living entities, who does not think himself a proprietor, who is free from false ego and equal both in happiness and distress, who is always satisfied and engaged in devotional service with determination and whose mind and intelligence are in agreement with Me-he is very dear to Me. 

Dealing with envy
One who is not envious but who is a kind friend to all living entities, who does not think himself a proprietor, who is free from false ego and equal both in happiness and distress, who is always satisfied and engaged in devotional service with determination and whose mind and intelligence are in agreement with Me-he is very dear to Me. 






→ TAKE AWAYS

3rd SECTION
SECTION 3 

CONNECTION BETWEEN YOU AND KṚṢṆA

Where am I going?
 - The World - Escape plan -The Prison House - (Material World)










Chapter 13
TWO BIRDS ON A TREE
THE INDIVIDUAL AND ULTIMATE CONSCIOUSNESS 

In this Chapter, Lord Kṛṣṇa shows us the difference between the physical body and the immortal soul - the transitory and the perishable vis-a-vis the immutable and the eternal.

Chapter 13: Paramatma- The (Lord) Lawyer in the Heart (Paramatma). I am going to get you out of this world and its program. You got the job but you are in jail. Two birds on the tree.

Prakriti, Purusha and consciousness 
The field and the knower of the field
Knowledge
The Supreme Soul
Prakriti and Purusa
To see with real vision
Soul within the body

One who understands the difference between the body, the soul and the Supersoul beyond them both attains liberation from this material world.

Arjuna opens Chapter Thirteen by inquiring about the field of activities and the knower of that field. Kṛṣṇa answers that the conditioned soul’s body and that body’s interactions within the material world are His limited field of activities. By understanding the difference between the body, the soul, and the Supersoul and by following the process of knowledge, the soul can transcend the good and the bad he meets, realize his eternal subordination to Kṛṣṇa, and attain the supreme destination.
The Thirteenth Chapter clearly explained that by humbly developing knowledge one can become free from material entanglement. It is also explained that the living entity’s entanglement within the material world due to his association with the modes of material nature (13. 20-22). 

Bg. 13.16 Loneliness

The Supreme Truth exists both internally and externally, in the moving and nonmoving. He is beyond the power of the material senses to see or to know. Although far, far away, He is also near to all. 

Bg. 13.18 Loneliness

He is the source of light in all luminous objects. He is beyond the darkness of matter and is unmanifested. He is knowledge, He is the object of knowledge, and He is the goal of knowledge. He is situated in everyone's heart. 



→ TAKE AWAYS


Chapter 14
THE PRISON BARS

In this Chapter, Lord Kṛṣṇa advises Arjuna to relinquish ignorance and passion and how everyone can adopt the path of pure goodness until they acquire the ability to transcend them.

The 3 Prison Bars (Modes) Kṛṣṇa explains the bars and gives us the tools how to cut the bars.

## The three gunas

nature and beings

Virtue, Passion and Ignorance
elevation beyond the gunas

# Now, in Chapter Fourteen, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, in detail, explains the three modes – goodness, passion and ignorance – those forces that bind and control all conditioned souls within this world. A soul can, however, transcend these modes through devotional service (All other processes are contaminated by the modes). Thus the limitations imposed by his field of activities can be overthrown and the soul can be elevated to the Brahman platform, the constitutional position of purity and happiness – a platform of which Kṛṣṇa is the basis.
As one must be detached from the modes and their results in order to be attached to the service of the Lord, Kṛṣṇa describes in Chapter Fifteen the process of freeing oneself from matter’s grip. He begins by comparing the material world to a gigantic, upside-down banyan tree, invoking Arjuna to detach himself from it through surrender. Thus, the soul can end his transmigrations and return to Him in the spiritual world.
Although the foolish cannot understand that the soul transmigrates, quitting one body to obtain a new body based on his mind’s desires, transcendentalists see this clearly. The foolish can learn to see properly by understanding that it is Kṛṣṇa who is the splendor of the sun, moon, and fire, as the one keeping the planets in orbit and making vegetables succulent. They can see Kṛṣṇa as the fire of digestion; as the Paramatma in everyone’s heart; as the giver of remembrance, knowledge, and forgetfulness; and as the goal of the Vedas and the compiler of Vedanta. Kṛṣṇa then reveals that knowing Him as the Supreme Personality of Godhead and engaging in His service is the ultimate purpose of the Vedanta and the most confidential part of the Vedas.


All embodied souls are under the control of the three modes, or qualities, of material nature: goodness, passion, and ignorance. Lord Kṛṣṇa explains what these modes are, how they act upon us, how one transcends them, and the symptoms of one who has attained the transcendental state.


Bg. 14.6 Feeling sinful

0 sinless one, the mode of goodness, being purer than the others, is illuminating, and it frees one from all sinful reactions. Those situated in that mode develop knowledge, hut they become conditioned by the concept of happiness. 

Bg. 14.17 Greed

From the mode of goodness, real knowledge develops; from the mode of passion, grief develops; and from the mode of ignorance, foolishness, madness and illusion develop. 



→ TAKE AWAYS


Chapter 15
THE SCAPE PLAN

In this Chapter, Lord Kṛṣṇa reveals the transcendental characteristics of the omnipotent, omniscient and omnipresent and explains the purpose and value of knowing and realizing God.

Chapter 15: Scape Plan (map) (The Vedas) Vedas give you the scape plan: where are the guards etc  verse 15.15 through the Vedas we can space.

## The Supreme Person

the banyan of the material world

the supreme kingdom
conditioning of the living entity by matter
Kṛṣṇa, base and sustainer of everything

# In Chapter Fifteen, auspicious, elevating activities were described as part of the banyan tree. 

The ultimate purpose of Vedic knowledge is to detach one self from the entanglement of the material world and to understand Lord Kṛṣṇa as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. One who understands Kṛṣṇa 's supreme identity surrenders unto Him and engages in His devotional service.



Bg. 15.15 Forgetfulness

I am seated in everyone's heart, and from Me come remembrance, knowledge and forgetfulness. By all the Vedas am I to he known; indeed I am the compiler of Vedanta, and I am the knower of the Vedas. 








→ TAKE AWAYS


Chapter 16
DIVINE AND EVIL NATURES: RIGHT CONDUCT IN JAIL

In this Chapter, Lord Kṛṣṇa explains in detail the divine properties, conduct and actions which are righteous in nature and conducive to divinity while delineating the evil and ill conducts.

## Divine and Divine Natures

divine nature
demonic nature

degradation and elevation of being

Chapter 16: The Inmates  In this prison are the goodies and the baddies or the baddies and the not so bad. Associate with goodies to go out sooner.

# In Chapter Sixteen, after mentioning twenty-six godly qualities, Kṛṣṇa explains the demoniac nature which degrades the soul through arrogant, ignorant, and conceited pursuits of sense gratification and power.
Kṛṣṇa explains the demonic mentality as follows: The world is unreal and is produced only of sex desire. Taking shelter of lust, they think of sense gratification as the goal of life and scheme to illegally increase their wealth. While plotting to kill their ‘competitor’ enemies, they think themselves powerful and happy, and they, surrounded by their relatives, use sacrifices and charity only to further increase their happiness. Perplexed by illusory anxieties, bewildered by self-complacency, impudency, and wealth; and envying the Supersoul within their own bodies and within the bodies of others, demons blaspheme real religion. These mischievous, lowest amongst men are repeatedly cast by Kṛṣṇa into demonic species to gradually sink to the most abominable forms of existence.
Kṛṣṇa ends the chapter by explaining that because lust, anger and greed are the beginnings of demonic life, all sane men should therefore give them up and understand their duty through faithfully following the scriptures.
Kṛṣṇa has concluded Chapter Sixteen by declaring that the ultimate difference between the divine and the demoniac is that the divine follow the scriptures while the demons do not. 
Those who possess demoniac qualities and who live whimsically, without following the regulations of scripture, attain lower births and further material bondage. But those who possess divine qualities and regulated lives, abiding by scriptural authority, gradually attain spiritual perfection.



Greed
There are three gates leading to this hell-lust, anger, and greed. Every sane man should give these up, for they lead to the degradation of the soul. 

Anger
Bg. 16.1-3 Practicing Forgiveness

The Blessed Lord said: Fearlessness, purification of one's existence, cultivation of spiritual knowledge, charity, self-control, performance of sacrifice, study of the Vedas, austerity and simplicity; nonviolence, truth­ fulness, freedom from anger; renunciation, tranquility, aversion to fault­ finding, compassion and freedom from covetousns; gentleness, modesty and steady determination; vigor, forgiveness, fortitude, cleanliness, free­ dom from envy and the passion for honor-these transcendental quali­ties, 0 son of Bharata, belong to godly men endowed with divine nature. 

Dealing with envy
Those who are envious and mischievous, who are the lowest among men, are cast by Me into the ocean of material existence, into various demoniac species of life. 


Bg. 16.4  Pride

Arrogance, pride, anger, conceit, harshness and ignorance-these quali­ ties belong to those of demonic nature, 0 son of Prtha. 


Bg. 16.13-15  Pride

The demoniac person thinks: "So much wealth do I have today, and I will gain more according to my schemes. So much is mine now, and it will increase in the future, more and more. He is my enemy, and I have killed him; and my other enemy will also be killed. I am the lord of everything, I am the enjoyer, I am perfect, powerful and happy. I am the richest man, surrounded by aristocratic relatives. There is none so powerful and happy as I am. I shall perform sacrifices, I shall give some charity, and thus I shall rejoice." In this way, such persons are deluded by ignorance. 


Bg. 16.19 Dealing with envy

Those who are envious and mischievous, who are the lowest among men, are cast by Me into the ocean of material existence, into various demoniac species of life. 


Bg. 16.21 Greed & Lust

There are three gates leading to this hell-lust, anger, and greed. Every sane man should give these up, for they lead to the degradation of the soul. 






→ TAKE AWAYS


Chapter 17
THE PRISON KEY
THE THREE TYPES OF MATERIAL EXISTENCE 


In this Chapter, Lord Kṛṣṇa tells us about the three divisions of faith and how these different qualities  determine that character of human beings and their consciousness in this world.

Chapter 17: KEY - Prison Key: easiest way to get out of the jail: last four verses and purports of the chapter give 3 worded mantra key om tat sat. Everything belongs to the Lord, thus everything should be offered to the <lord. If you live by that, you are free. That is the key. More detailed descritpion of the chapters 14 and 15. 
Bhagavad gita ends in 17 chapters, but you cannot do the things or ubnderstand, then go to chapter 18. Nothing is working so chapter 18.



The branches of faith

Faith
Food
Sacrifices
Austerities 
Charity
The om tat sat 

# In the beginning of Chapter Seventeen, Arjuna inquires more about those who don’t follow scriptures, but who worship according to their imaginations. Kṛṣṇa answers by describing how the combination of the modes of material nature that control a particular person will dictate a person’s faith, worship, eating, sacrifices, charity and austerity. The chapter ends with Kṛṣṇa explaining the syllables ‘om tat sat’ and how these syllables indicate that any sacrifice, austerity, or charity dictated by the modes and performed without devotional service is useless in this lif the next. One should therefore directly take to Kṛṣṇa’s service in Kṛṣṇa consciousnes.

There are three types of faith, corresponding to and evolving from the three modes of material nature. Acts performed by those whose faith is in passion and ignorance yield only impermanent, material results, whereas acts performed in goodness, in accord with scriptural injunctions, purify the heart and lead to pure faith in Lord Kṛṣṇa and devotion to Him.

Greed

One should perform sacrifice, penance and charity with the word tat. The purpose of such transcendental activities is to get free from the material entanglement. 



→ TAKE AWAYS


Chapter 18
IF ALL ELSE FAILS, DO THIS

In this Chapter, Lord Kṛṣṇa summarizes the takeaways from the previous chapters and describes the attainment of salvation by the paths of karma and jnana yoga as Arjuna learns to tell nectar from poison and returns to war.  

## The perfect renunciation 

Renunciation and sannyasa 

The factors of the action

Knowledge, action actor

Intelligence and determination 

The three kinds of happiness 

The four varnas and the duty 

The spiritual realization 

Surrender to the Supreme Lord

# The entire Bhagavad-gita is concluded in seventeen chapters, and in the Eighteen Chapter, Kṛṣṇa reviews the knowledge already presented. In this chapter Kṛṣṇa concludes, as He has done througout the Bhagavad-gita, that one should practice devotional service – Kṛṣṇa conciousness.
Since Arjuna’s basic desire to renounce his duty of fighting was fear of sinful reaction, Kṛṣṇa explains true renunciation and how to transcend sinful reactions through (1) becoming renounced from the fruits of activities,(2) abiding by the order of the Supersoul, and (3) worshiping the Lord through one’s fruits of work by acting either as ‘brahmana’,’ksatryia’,’vaisya’, or ‘sudra’ according to one’s mode of nature. (Each leads Arjuna to fight) Thus, one can achieve the self-realized position of ‘brahma-bhuta’ and that position, detached from all material things, one can practice pure devotional service.
Kṛṣṇa can only be known through surrendering to Him in devotional service, and by this direct process – free from karma or jnana, Arjuna should need not fear any sinful reactions. Under Kṛṣṇa’s protection, such a pure devotee will reach “Kṛṣṇa-loka”. Kṛṣṇa instructs Arjuna that he should surrender to the Supreme Lord within his heart and thus attain peace in His supreme, eternal abode. The most confidential knowledge is then explained by Kṛṣṇa: “Become My devotee, always think of Me, act for Me, worship Me, and offer all homage unto Me. Surrender unto Me alone. Do not fear sinful reactions.”
After hearing the instructions of Sri Kṛṣṇa, Arjuna is fixed and ready to fight. Sanjaya, after narrating this conversation to Dhritarashtra, ecstatically thinks of the wondrous two-armed form of Kṛṣṇa and predicts victory for Arjuna, the supreme archer, for he is surrendered to Kṛṣṇa, the master of all mystics.


Kṛṣṇa explains the meaning of renunciation and the effects of the modes of nature on human consciousness and activity. He explains Brahman realization, the glories of the Bhagavad-gita, and the ultimate conclusion of the Gita: the highest path of religion is absolute, unconditional loving surrender unto Lord Kṛṣṇa, which frees one from all sins, brings one to complete enlightenment, and enables one to return to Kṛṣṇa's eternal spiritual abode.

The Gita ends with Kṛṣṇa telling Arjuna he must choose the path of good or evil, as it his his duty to fight the Kauravas for his kingdom. In that, he is correcting the balance of good and evil, fulfilling his dharma, and offering the deepest form of selfless service. Arjuna understands and, with that, proceeds into battle.

Discourse 18, “The Yoga of Liberation by Renunciation,” concludes the discussion focusing on Jñana Yoga and resolves Arjuna’s moral dilemma, which evoked the whole Gita. It is appropriately the longest discourse in the poem. It deals particularly with the relationship between knowledge Gnana) and action (karma), which is what Arjuna needs to know in order to choose wisely among the options facing him, that is, in order to discriminate (the first of the qualifications for the Path according to the Viveka Chudamani and At the Feet of the Master).


Confusion
The Supreme Lord is situated in everyone's heart, 0 Arjuna, and is directing the wanderings of all living entities, who are seated as on a machine, made of the material energy. 

Dealing with envy
And one who listens with faith and without envy becomes free from sinful reaction and attains to the planets where the pious dwell. 

Demotivated
Every endeavor is covered by some sort of fault, just as fire is covered by smoke. Therefore one should not give up the work which is born of his nature, 0 son of Kunti, even if such work is full of fault. 

Wherever there is Krpa, the master of all mystics, and wherever there is Arjuna, the supreme archer, there will also certainly be opulence, victo­ ry, extraordinary power, and morality. That is my opinion. 

Bg. 18.26  Pride

The worker who is free from all material attachments and false ego, who is enthusiastic and resolute and who is indifferent to success or failure, is a worker in the mode of goodness. 


Bg. 18.30 Fear

O son of Prtha, that understanding by which one knows what ought to be done and what ought not to be done, what is to be feared and what is not to be feared, what is binding and what is liberating, that understanding is established in the mode of goodness. 


Bg. 18.39 Laziness

And that happiness which is blind to self-realization, which is delusion from beginning to end and which arises from sleep, laziness and illusion is said to be of the nature of ignorance. 


Bg. 18.48 Demotivated

Every endeavor is covered by some sort of fault, just as fire is covered by smoke. Therefore one should not give up the work which is born of his nature, 0 son of Kunti, even if such work is full of fault. 



Bg. 18.58  Pride

If you become conscious of Me, you will pass over all the obstacles of conditional life by My grace. If, however, you do not work in such con­ sciousness but act through false ego, not hearing Me, you will be lost. 


Bg. 18.61 Confusion & Forgetfulness

The Supreme Lord is situated in everyone's heart, 0 Arjuna, and is directing the wanderings of all living entities, who are seated as on a machine, made of the material energy. 


Bg. 18.66 Feeling sinful & Losing hope

Abandon all varieties of religion and just surrender unto Me. I shall deliver you from all sinful reaction. Do not fear. 


Bg. 18.71 Dealing with envy

And one who listens with faith and without envy becomes free from sinful reaction and attains to the planets where the pious dwell. 


Bg. 18.78 Demotivated & Losing hope

Wherever there is Kṛṣṇa, the master of all mystics, and wherever there is Arjuna, the supreme archer, there will also certainly be opulence, victo­ry, extraordinary power, and morality. That is my opinion. 

Chapter 18: Follow me: If chapter 15 16 and 17 does not work or cant do it, just follow me. sarva dharman paritjyaija. vraja means go.  just follow me. dont worry. 18.66 Lawyer comes to our rescue. All crimes will be purified, the reasons you are in jail will be cleared, forget about all dharmas, just hold to Kṛṣṇa intrcutions, guidance, lotuus feet and you will be free, you will get moksha.

Kṛṣṇa is Lawyer 24/7 I will show how to cut the bars, the map, the plan of the prioson house, with whom you shoud asociate with, the key. And if everything fails just follow me and you will be OK.

→ TAKE AWAYS
